IV. THE ASSEMBLIES


There were two kinds of assemblies; the one, known as the Sabbath, was the
General Meeting of all the members of the religion; the other, to which I
give--on the authority of Estebène de Cambrue--the name of Esbat, was only
for the special and limited number who carried out the rites and practices
of the cult, and was not for the general public.

The derivation of the word Sabbath in this connexion is quite unknown. It
has clearly nothing to do with the number seven, and equally clearly it is
not connected with the Jewish ceremonial. It is possibly a derivative of
_s'esbattre_, 'to frolic'; a very suitable description of the joyous gaiety
of the meetings.


1. _Sabbath_

_Locomotion._--The method of going to the meetings varied according to the
distance to be traversed. In an immense majority of cases the means of
locomotion are not even mentioned, presumably therefore the witches went on
foot, as would naturally be the case in going to the local meeting or
Esbat, which was attended only by those who lived near. There are, however,
a few instances where it was thought worth while to mention that the
worshippers walked to the meeting. Boguet (1598), who yields to none in his
accounts of magical means of going to the Sabbath, says, 'les Sorciers
neãtmoins vont quelquefois de pied au Sabbat, ce qui leur aduient
principalement, lors que le lieu, où ils font leur assemblée, n'est pas
guieres eslongné de leur habitation', and cites in confirmation the
evidence of George and Antoinette Gandillon and their father Pierre, Clauda
Ianprost, Clauda Ianguillaume, Iaquema Paget, Gros Iaques, the two brothers
Claude and Claude Charloz, Pierre Willermoz, l'Aranthon, Pernette Molard,
Ianne Platet, and Clauda Paget.[328] Iaquema Paget's account of how she and
Antoine Tornier went to a meeting on their way home from the harvest field
(see p. 121), proves that they were on foot. The Lang-Niddry witches (1608)
clearly walked, they 'convenit thame selffis at Deane-fute of Lang-Niddry
... thaireftir thay past altogidder to the said Beigis hous in Lang-Nydry
[where they drank]; and thaireftir come with all thair speid to
Seaton-thorne be-north the zet; quhair the Devill callit for the said
Christiane Tod, and past to Robert Smartis house, and brocht hir out....
And thay thaireftir past altogidder, with the Devill, to the irne zet of
Seatoun.... And thaireftir come all bak agane to the Deane-fute, quhair
first thai convenit.'[329] The distance from Lang Niddry to Seaton Castle
is under a mile. Isaac de Queyran (1609), a young fellow of twenty-five,
told de Lancre that those living at a distance flew home through the air,
the near ones returned on foot.[330] Barthélemy Minguet of Brécy was tried
in 1616: 'Enquis, de quelle façon sa femme fut au Sabbat la premiere fois.
Respond, qu'elle y fut transportée par le Diable, lequel la rapporta apres
le Sabbat, & que la seconde fois qu'elle y a esté, elle y fut de son pied
avec luy, & s'en retourna de son pied, & qu'elle n'y a iamais esté que ces
deux fois.'[331] Helen Guthrie of Forfar (1661) said that 'herselfe,
Isobell Shyrie, and Elspet Alexander, did meit togither at ane aile house
near to Barrie, a litle befor sunsett, efter they hade stayed in the said
house about the spaice of ane houre drinking of thrie pintis of ale
togidder, they went foorth to the sandis, and ther thrie other women met
them, and the divell wes there present with them all ... and they parted so
late that night that she could get no lodging, but wes forced to lye at ane
dyk syde all night.'[332] Christian Grieve, of Crook of Devon (1662),
acknowledged 'that ye came to the foresaid meeting immediately after your
goodman and the rest went to bed, and that ye locked the door and put the
key under the same, and that ye and the said Margaret Young your neighbor
came foot for foot to the foresaid meeting and that ye stayed at the
foresaid meeting about the space of two hours and came back again on your
foot, and the foresaid Margaret Young with you, and found the key of the
door in that same place where you left it, and declared that neither your
husband nor any other in the house was waking at your return'.[333] At
Lille (1661) the girl Bellot, then aged fifteen, said that 'her Mother had
taken her with her when she was very Young, and had even carried her in her
Arms to the Witches Sabbaths or Assemblies'.[334] At Strathdown (eighteenth
century) the witches went along the side of the river Avon to
Craic-pol-nain, fording the river on foot.[335]

In the cases cited above there is nothing in the least bizarre or
extraordinary, but there are other methods recorded of reaching the distant
meetings. Sometimes the obvious means was by riding on a horse; sometimes
the witches were accused, or claimed the power, of flying through the air,
of riding in the air on a stick, of riding on animals or human beings,
which latter were sometimes in their own natural form and sometimes
enchanted into the form of animals.

The following instances are of those who rode to or from the meetings on
horseback. Agnes Sampson of North Berwick (1590) said that 'the Devil in
mans likeness met her going out in the fields from her own house at
_Keith_, betwixt five and six at even, being her alone and commanded her to
be at _North-Berwick_ Kirk the next night: And she passed there on
horse-back, conveyed by her Good-son, called Iohn Couper'.[336] Boguet
(1608) mentions, in passing, the fact that the witches sometimes rode on
horses.[337] The Lancashire witches (1613), after the meeting at Malking
Tower, 'went out of the said House in their owne shapes and likenesses. And
they all, by that they were forth of the dores, gotten on Horseback, like
vnto foals, some of one colour, some of another.'[338] This was the usual
mode of locomotion among the Lancashire witches, for Margaret Johnson
(1633) said that at the meeting at Hoarstones 'there was, at y^t tyme,
between 30 and 40 witches, who did all ride to the said meetinge'.[339]
Isobell Gowdie (1662) said, 'I haid a little horse, and wold say, "Horse
and Hattock, in the Divellis name!"'[340] The most detailed account is from
Sweden (1669):

     'Another Boy confessed too, that one day he was carried away by his
     Mistriss, and to perform the Journey he took his own Father's Horse
     out of the Meadow where it was, and upon his return she let the Horse
     go in her own ground. The next morning the Boys Father sought for his
     Horse, and not finding it, gave it over for lost; but the Boy told him
     the whole story, and so his Father fetcht the Horse back again.'[341]

We now come to the marvellous and magical means of locomotion. The belief
in the power of witches to ride in the air is very ancient and universal in
Europe. They flew either unsupported, being carried by the Devil, or were
supported on a stick; sometimes, however, an animal which they rode passed
through the air. The flying was usually preceded by an anointing of the
whole or part of the body with a magical ointment.

The earliest example of unsupported flying is from Paul Grilland (1537),
who gives an account of an Italian witch in 1526, who flew in the air with
the help of a magic ointment.[342]

Reginald Scot (1584) says that the ointment 'whereby they ride in the aire'
was made of the flesh of unbaptized children, and gives two recipes:

     [1] 'The fat of yoong children, and seeth it with water in a brasen
     vessell, reseruing the thickest of that which remaineth boiled in the
     bottome, which they laie up and keepe, untill occasion serueth to use
     it. They put hereunto Eleoselinum, Aconitum, Frondes populeas, and
     Soote.' [2] 'Sium, acarum vulgare, pentaphyllon, the blood of a
     flitter mouse, solanum somniferum, and oleum. They stampe all these
     togither, and then they rubbe all parts of their bodys exceedinglie,
     till they looke red, and be verie hot, so as the pores may be opened,
     and their flesh soluble and loose. They ioine herewithall either fat,
     or oil in steed thereof, that the force of the ointment maie the
     rather pearse inwardly, and so be more effectuall. By this means in a
     moonlight night they seeme to be carried in the aire.'[343]

So far this is only hearsay evidence, but there is also a certain amount of
first-hand testimony, the witches declaring that they actually passed
through the air above ground, or had seen others do so.

     In 1598 'Thieuenne Paget racontoit, que le Diable s'apparut à elle la
     premiere fois en plein midy, en forme d'vn grand homme noir, & que
     comme elle se fut baillée à luy, il l'embrassa & l'esleva en l'air, &
     la transporta en la maison du prel de Longchamois ... & puis la
     rapporta au lieu mesme, où il l'auoit prise. Antide Colas disoit, que
     le soir, que Satan s'apparut à elle en forme d'vn homme de grande
     stature, ayant sa barbe & ses habillemens noirs, il la transporta au
     Sabbat, & qu'aux autres fois, il la venoit prendre dans son lict, &
     l'emportoit comme si c'eust esté vn vent froid, l'empoignant par la
     teste.'[344]

Isaac de Queyran (1609), whose evidence has already been quoted, said that
the witches living at a distance flew home through the air.[345] In France
(1652) 'lors qu'elle vouloit aller aux danses, elle se oindoit d'ung onguen
qui lui estoit donné par vn sorcier envoyé par le diable. Que lors elle
s'en alloit comme ung vent aux dictes danses avecque les aultres.'[346] At
Crook of Devon (1661) Bessie Henderson confessed 'that ye was taken out of
your bed to that meeting in an flight'.[347] The most detail comes from an
English source: the Somerset witches (1664) claimed that they habitually
flew through the air by means of a magical oil and magical words. Elizabeth
Style said:

     'Before they are carried to their meetings, they anoint their
     Foreheads, and Hand-wrists with an Oyl the Spirit brings them (which
     smells raw) and then they are carried in a very short time, using
     these words as they pass, _Thout, tout a tout, tout, throughout and
     about_. And when they go off from their Meetings, they say, _Rentum,
     Tormentum_ ... all are carried to their several homes in a short
     space.' Alice Duke gave the same testimony, noting besides that the
     oil was greenish in colour. Anne Bishop, the Officer of the Somerset
     covens, confessed that 'her Forehead being first anointed with a
     Feather dipt in Oyl, she hath been suddenly carried to the place of
     their meeting.... After all was ended, the Man in black vanished. The
     rest were on a sudden conveighed to their homes.'[348]

The belief that the witches actually rode in the air seated on some
concrete object, such as an animal, a human being, or a stick, is both
ancient and universal, and is reflected in the ecclesiastical and civil
laws, of which the earliest is the decree of the ninth century, attributed
to the Council of Ancyra. 'Certeine wicked women following sathans
prouocations, being seduced by the illusion of diuels, beleeve and
professe, that in the night times they ride abroad with _Diana_, the
goddesse of the _Pagans_, or else with _Herodias_, with an innumerable
multitude, vpon certeine beasts ... and doo whatsoeuer those fairies or
ladies command.'[349] The laws of Lorraine (1329-46) decree that 'celui qui
fera magie, sortilège, billets de sort, pronostic d'oiseau ou se vanteroit
d'avoir chevauché la nuit avec Diane ou telle autre vielle qui se dit
magicienne, sera banni et payera dix livres tournois'.[350]

The witches themselves confirmed the statements about riding on animals to
the Sabbath. Rolande du Vernier (1598) confessed 'que lors qu'elle y fut,
elle y alla sur vn gros mouton noir, qui la portoit si viste en l'air,
qu'elle ne se pouuoit recognoistre'.[351] De Lancre says that the witches
'se font porter iusqu'audit lieu, sur vne beste, qui semble parfois vn
cheual, & parfoys vn homme'.[352] Margaret Johnson (1633) 'saith, if they
desyre to be in any place upon a sodaine, theire devill or spirit will,
upon a rodde, dogge, or any thinge els, presently convey them
thither'.[353] One of Madame Bourignon's girls, then aged twelve (1661),
declared that 'her said Lover came upon a little Horse, and took her by the
Hand, asking her if she would be his Mistress, and she saying Ay, she was
catched up into the Air with him and the other Girls, and they flew all
together to a great Castle'.[354] The Swedish witches (1669) said:

     'He set us on a Beast which he had there ready, and carried us over
     Churches and high walls ... he gives us a horn with a Salve in it,
     wherewith we do anoint our selves; and then he gives us a Saddle, with
     a Hammer and a wooden nail, thereby to fix the Saddle; whereupon we
     call upon the Devil, and away we go.... For their journey they said
     they made use of all sorts of Instruments, of Beasts, of Men, of Spits
     and Posts. What the manner of their Journey is, God alone knows....
     Blockula is scituated in a delicate large Meadow whereof you can see
     no end. They went into a little Meadow distinct from the other, where
     the Beasts went that they used to ride on: But the Men whom they made
     use of in their Journey, stood in the House by the Gate in a
     slumbering posture, sleeping against the wall.'[355]

Human beings were also said to be ridden upon in other places besides
Sweden. Agnes Spark of Forfar (1661) said she 'hard people ther present did
speake of Isabell Shirie, and say that shoe was the devill's horse, and
that the divill did allwayes ryde upon hir, and that shoe was shoad lyke
ane mare, or ane horse'.[356] Ann Armstrong, of a Northumbrian Coven
(1673)--

     'saith, that since she gave information against severall persons who
     ridd her to severall places where they had conversation with the
     divell, she hath beene severall times lately ridden by Anne Driden and
     Anne Forster, and was last night ridden by them to the rideing house
     in the close on the common.... Whilst she was lying in that condition
     [i.e. "a fitt"], which happened one night a little before Christmas,
     about the change of the moone, the informant see the said Anne Forster
     come with a bridle, and bridled her and ridd upon her crosse-leggd,
     till they come to (the) rest of her companions at Rideing millne
     bridg-end, where they usually mett. And when she light of her back,
     pulld the bridle of this informer's head, now in the likenesse of a
     horse; but, when the bridle was taken of, she stood up in her own
     shape.... And when they had done, bridled this informer, and the rest
     of the horses, and rid home.... Upon Collupp Munday last, being the
     tenth of February, the said persons met at Allensford, where this
     informant was ridden upon by an inchanted bridle by Michael Aynsley
     and Margaret his wife. Which inchanted bridle, when they tooke it from
     her head, she stood upp in her owne proper person.... On Monday last
     at night, she, being in her father's house, see one Jane Baites, of
     Corbridge, come in the forme of a gray catt with a bridle hanging on
     her foote, and breath'd upon her and struck her dead, and bridled her,
     and rid upon her in the name of the devill southward, but the name of
     the place she does not now remember. And the said Jane allighted and
     pulld the bridle of her head.'[357]

The method of locomotion which has most impressed the popular imagination
and has become proverbial was riding on a stick, generally said to be a
broomstick. It must, however, be remembered that one of the earliest cases
on record of stick-riding does not definitely state that the witch flew
through the air. This was the case of the Lady Alice Kyteler in 1324, when
'in rifleing the closet of the ladie, they found a Pipe of oyntment,
wherewith she greased a staffe, upon the which she ambled and galloped
through thick and thin, when and in what maner she listed'.[358] Though
Holinshed is not always a reliable authority, it is worth while to compare
this account with the stick-riding of the Arab witches and the tree-riding
of the Aberdeen Covens (see pp. 110, 134).

The number of cases vouched for by the persons who actually performed or
saw the feat of riding on a stick through the air are disappointingly few.
Guillaume Edeline, prior of St. Germain-en-Laye (1453), 'se mit en telle
servitude de l'ennemy, qu'il luy convenoit estre en certain lieu toutes
fois qu'il estoit par ledit ennemy évocqué: ouquel lieu ilz avoient
accoustumé faire leur consistoire, et ne luy falloit que monter sur ung
balay, qu'aussi-tost il estoit prestement transporté là où ledit
consistoire se faisoit'.[359] The Guernsey witch, Martin Tulouff (1563),
confessed '[*q] il soy est trouvé avecq la dite viellesse ou elle
chevaucha ung genest et luy ung aultre, et [*q] lad^te viellesse monta a
mont la chemynee et [*q] il en perdyt la veue et [*q] elle disoet devãt
[*q] monter "Va au nom du diable et luciffer dess[~q=] roches et espyñes"
et [*q] po^r luy il ne pouvoet ainsy faire, et d^t [*q] sa mere a
chevauche le genest [*p] IV ou V foys et [*q] il l'a veue monter a mont la
cheminee'.[360] Danaeus (1575) sums up the evidence of the witches
themselves: 'He promiseth that himself will conuay them thither, that are
so weak that they cannot trauaile of themselues: which many tymes he doth
by meanes of a staffe or rod, which he deliuereth vnto th[~e], or promiseth
to doo it by force of a certen oyntment, which he will geue them: and
sometimes he offreth them an horse to ride vpon.'[361] Boguet's experience
(1598) is more dramatic than that of Danaeus: 'Les autres y vont, tantost
sur vn Bouc, tantost sur vn cheual, & tantost sur vn ballet, ou ramasse,
sortans ces derniers de leurs maisons le plus souuent par la cheminee....
Les vns encor se frottent auparauant de certaine graisse, & oignement: les
autres ne se frottent en aucune façon.'[362] He also records the actual
evidence of individual witches: Françoise Secretain said 'qu'elle avoit
esté vne infinité de fois au Sabbat & assemblee des Sorciers ... & qu'elle
y alloit sur vn baston blanc, qu'elle mettoit entre ses
iambes.[363]--Claudine Boban, ieune fille confessa, qu'elle, & sa mere
montoient sur vne ramasse,[364] & que sortans le contremont de la cheminée
elles alloient par l'air en ceste façon au Sabbat.'[365] In Belgium Claire
Goessen (1603) confessed 'qu'elle s'est trouvée à diverses assemblées
nocturnes tenues par lui, dans lesquelles elle s'est laissée transporter au
moyen d'un bâton enduit d'onguent'.[366] Isobell Gowdie (1662) was fully
reported as regards the methods of locomotion used by the witches, though
in other places her evidence is unfortunately cut short:

     'I haid a little horse, and wold say, "Horse and Hattock, in the
     Divellis name!" And than ve void flie away, quhair ve vold, be ewin as
     strawes wold flie wpon an hie-way. We will flie lyk strawes quhan we
     pleas; wild-strawes and corne-strawes wilbe horses to ws, an ve put
     thaim betwixt our foot, and say, "Horse and Hattok, in the Divellis
     name!" ... Quhan we wold ryd, we tak windle-strawes, or been-stakes
     [bean-stalks], and put them betwixt owr foot, and say thryse,

    Horse and Hattok, horse and goe,
    Horse and pellattis, ho! ho!

     and immediatlie we flie away whair euir we wold.... All the Coeven did
     fflie lyk cattis, bot Barbara Ronald, in Brightmanney, and I, still
     [always] read on an horse, quhich ve vold mak of a straw or
     beein-stalk.'[367]

Julian Cox (1664) said that 'one evening she walkt out about a Mile from
her own House, and there came riding towards her three persons upon three
Broom-staves, born up about a yard and an half from the ground. Two of them
she formerly knew, which was a Witch and a Wizzard.... The third person she
knew not. He came in the shape of a black Man.'[368] Two of the New England
witches (1692) confessed to riding on a pole; Mary Osgood, wife of Capt.
Osgood of Andover, 'was carried through the air to five-mile pond ... she
was transported back again through the air, in company with the forenamed
persons, in the same manner as she went, and believes they were carried
upon a pole'.[369] Goody Foster's evidence was reported by two authors:
'One Foster confessed that the Devil carry'd them on a pole, to a
Witch-meeting; but the pole broke, and she hanging about [Martha] Carrier's
neck, they both fell down, and she then received an hurt by the Fall,
whereof she was not at this very time recovered.'[370] The second account
is substantially the same: 'In particular Goody F. said (_Inter alia_) that
she with two others (one of whom acknowledged the same) Rode from Andover
to the same Village Witch meeting upon a stick above ground, and that in
the way the stick brake, and gave the said F. a fall: whereupon, said she,
I got a fall and hurt of which I am still sore.'[371]

_Site._--The Sabbath seems to have been originally held on a fixed site. So
much so was this the case that de Lancre is able to say, 'communement ils
l'appellent Aquelarre, qui signifie Lane de Bouc, comme qui diroit la lane
ou lãde, où le Bouc conuoque ses assemblees. Et de faict les Sorciers qui
confessent, nomm[~e]t le lieu pour la chose, & la chose ou Assemblee pour
le lieu: tellement qu'encore que proprement Lane de Bouc, soit le Sabbat
qui se tient és landes, si est-ce qu'ils appellent aussi bien Lane de Bouc,
le Sabbat qui se tient és Eglises, & és places des villages, paroisses,
maisons, & autres lieux.'[372] The confusion of the original _Lane de
Bouc_, i.e. the Sabbath or Great Assembly, with local meetings is thus
shown to be due to the inaccuracy of the witches themselves; and therefore
it is not surprising that de Lancre and other authors should also fail to
distinguish between the two. Still, in many of the records there are
certain indications by which it is possible to recognize the localities
where the real Sabbath, the true _Lane de Bouc_, was held.

De Lancre himself notes that the Sabbath must be held near a lake, stream,
or water of some kind.[373] Bodin, however, gives a better clue, 'Les lieux
des assemblees des Sorciers sont notables, & signalez de quelques arbres,
ou croix.'[374] The _croix_ is clearly the Christian form of the standing
stone which is a marked feature in many descriptions of the Sabbath; and
Bodin's statement recalls one of the laws of Cnut in the eleventh century,
'We earnestly forbid every heathenism: heathenism is, that men worship
idols; that is that they worship heathen gods, or stones, or forest trees
of any kind.'

Estebène de Cambrue (1567) said, 'Le lieu de ceste grande conuocation
s'appelle generalement par tout le pays la Lanne de Bouc. Où ils se mettent
à dancer à l'entour d'vne pierre, qui est plantée audit lieu, sur laquelle
est assis vn grand homme noir.'[375] At Poictiers in 1574 four witches, one
woman and three men, said that they went 'trois fois l'an, à l'assemblee
generale, où plusieurs Sorciers se trouuoy[~e]t prés d'vne croix d'vn
carrefour, qui seruoit d'enseigne'.[376] At Aberdeen in 1596 the witches
acknowledged that they danced round the market cross and the 'fische croce'
on All-Hallow-eve; and also round 'ane gray stane' at the foot of the hill
at Craigleauch.[377] Margaret Johnson (1633) said 'shee was not at the
greate meetinge at Hoarestones at the Forest of Pendle upon All Saints
day'.[378] Though no stone is actually mentioned the name suggests that
there had been, or still were, one or more stones standing in that place.
The Swedish witches (1669) seem to have used the same site for both kinds
of meetings; _Blockula_ seems to have been a building of some kind, set in
a meadow which was entered by a painted gate; within the building were
rooms and some kind of chapel for the religious service.[379] The New
England recorders (1692) did not enter into much detail, but even among
them the fact is mentioned that there was 'a General Meeting of the
Witches, in a Field at _Salem_-Village'.[380]

In modern times the identification of stones or of certain places with the
Devil or with witch meetings is very noticeable. Out of innumerable
instances I will mention only a few. In Guernsey the Catioroc is always
identified as the site of the Sabbath. In Belgium 'à Godarville (Hainaut)
se trouve un _tunnel_ hanté par les sorcières; elles y tiennent leur
sabbat'.[381]

     'Un bloc de pierre isolé et d'aspect extraordinaire est généralement
     appelé _pierre du diable_. Exemples: A) le dolmen détruit près de
     Namur; B) la grande pierre en forme de table à demi encastrée dans la
     route qui conduit du village de Sény à celui d'Ellemelle (Candroz); C)
     _le fais du diable_, bloc de grès d'environ 800 mètres cubes, isolé
     dans la bruyère entre Wanne et Grand-Halleux près de Stavelot; D) les
     _murs du diable_ à Pepinster, &c.--Dans plusieurs cantons, il y a un
     terrain que l'on appèle _tchan dè makral_, "champ des sorciers". C'est
     le cas près de Remouchamps, près de Tongres, près de la Gileppe et
     près de Grand-Halleux.'[382]

It is also noticeable how many of our own stone circles, such as the Nine
Maidens, the Dancing Maidens, and so on, are connected by tradition with
women who danced there on the Sabbath.

_Date._--It appears from the evidence that certain changes took place in
course of time in the religion; and, as might be expected, this is shown
very markedly in the festivals. The ancient festivals remained all through,
and to them were added the festivals of the succeeding religions. The
original celebrations belonged to the May-November year, a division of time
which follows neither the solstices nor the agricultural seasons; I have
shown below (pp. 130, 178) that there is reason to believe these festivals
were connected with the breeding seasons of the flocks and herds. The chief
festivals were: in the spring, May Eve (April 30), called Roodmas or Rood
Day in Britain and Walpurgis-Nacht in Germany; in the autumn, November Eve
(October 31), called in Britain Allhallow Eve. Between these two came: in
the winter, Candlemas (February 2); and in the summer, the Gule of August
(August 1), called Lammas in Britain. To these were added the festivals of
the solstitial invaders, Beltane at midsummer and Yule at midwinter; the
movable festival of Easter was also added, but the equinoxes were never
observed in Britain. On the advent of Christianity the names of the
festivals were changed, and the date of one--Roodmas--was slightly altered
so as to fall on May 3; otherwise the dates were observed as before, but
with ceremonies of the new religion. Therefore Boguet is justified in
saying that the witches kept all the Christian festivals. But the Great
Assemblies were always held on the four original days, and it is this fact
which makes it possible to distinguish with certainty between the Sabbath
and the Esbat whenever dates are mentioned.

De Lancre, generalizing from the evidence before him, says, 'Quelquefois il
y a des Sabbats & assemblees generales qui se font ordinairement les quatre
festes annuelles';[383] and he also gives the words of a witch, tried in
1567: 'Estebène de Cambrue dit que les Sorcieres n'alloient en la grande
assemblee & au grand Sabbat que quatre fois l'année.'[384] The four actual
days are given in only one trial, that of Issobell Smyth at Forfar in 1661,
'By these meitings shee mett with him every quarter at Candlemas, Rud-day,
Lambemas, and Hallomas',[385] but it is very clear that these were the
regular days, from the mention of them individually in both England and
Scotland. At North Berwick 'Barbara Napier was accused of being present at
the convention on Lammas Eve at the New haven' [three Covens, i.e.
thirty-nine persons, were assembled]. 'And the said Barbara was accused
that she gave her bodily presence upon All Hallow even last was, 1590
years, to the frequent convention holden at the Kirk of North-Berwick,
where she danced endlong the Kirk-yard, and Gelie Duncan played on a trump,
John Fian, missellit, led the ring; Agnes Sampson and her daughters and all
the rest following the said Barbara, to the number of seven score
persons.'[386] The dittays against the witches of Aberdeen in 1596 show
that 'wpoun Hallowewin last bypast, att tuelff houris at ewin or thairby,
thow the said Thomas Leyis ... withe ane gryit number of vtheris witchis,
come to the mercatt and fische croce of Aberdene, wnder the conduct and
gyding of the Dewill present withe you, all in company, playing befoir yow
on his kynd of instrumentis. Ye all dansit about baythe the saidis croces,
and the meill mercatt, ane lang space of tyme.'[387] Christen Michell and
Bessie Thom had been not only at the Allhallow Eve meeting with Thomas
Leyis but also at another before that. 'Thow confessis that, thrie yeris
sensyn, vpon the Ruidday, airlie in the morning,' [Bessie Thom: 'befoir
sone rysing'] 'thow, accumpaniet with ... certan vtheris witchis, thy
devilische adherentis, convenit vpon Sainct Katherines Hill ... and thair,
vnder the conduct of Sathan, present with yow, playing befoir yow, efter
his forme, ye all dansit a devilische danse, rydand on treis, be a lang
space.'[388] In 1597 Issobell Richie, Margrat Og, Helene Rogie, Jonet
Lucas, Jonet Dauidsone, Issobell Oige, and Beatrice Robbie were accused of
a meeting at Craigleauche, near Aberdeen: 'Thow art indyttit for the being
at the twa devylische dances betuixt Lumfannand and Cragleauche, with
vmquhile Margerat Bane, vpon Alhalowewin last, quhair thow conferrit with
the Dewill.'[389] In Ayrshire in 1604 Patrik Lowrie and his
companion-witches were accused that they 'att Hallowevin in the yeir of God
foirsaid, assemblit thame selffis vpon Lowdon-hill, quhair thair appeirit
to thame ane devillische Spreit'.[390] Margaret Johnson, of the second
generation of Lancashire witches, in 1633 said 'shee was not at the greate
meetinge at Hartford in the Forrest of Pendle on All Saintes day'.[391]
Isobel Gowdie (Auldearne, 1662) does not enter into her usual detail, but
merely states that 'a Grand Meitting vold be about the end of ilk
Quarter'.[392]

Of the festivals belonging to later religions several mentions are made. De
Lancre, when giving a general account of the ceremonies, says that the
witches of the Basses-Pyrénées went to their assemblies at Easter and other
solemn festivals, and that their chief night was that of St. John the
Baptist.[393] Jane Bosdeau, from the Puy-de-Dôme district (1594), bears
this out, for she went to a meeting with the Devil 'at Midnight on the Eve
of St. John'.[394] Antide Colas (1598) 'auoit esté au Sabbat à vn chacun
bon iour de l'an, comme à Noel, à Pasques, à la feste de Dieu'.[395] Both
generations of Lancashire witches (1613 and 1633) kept Good Friday.[396]
Jonet Watson of Dalkeith (1661) was at a meeting 'about the tyme of the
last Baille-ffyre night'.[397] The Crook of Devon witches (1662) met on St.
Andrew's Day, at Yule.[398] In Connecticut (1662) the 'high frolic' was to
be held at Christmas.[399]

_Hour._--The actual hour at which the Sabbath was held is specified in very
few cases; it appears to have been a nocturnal assembly, beginning about
midnight and lasting till early dawn or cockcrow. 'Le coq s'oyt par fois és
sabbats sonnãt la retraicte aux Sorciers.'[400]

In the Vosges in 1408 the meeting was held 'en la minuit et la deuxieme
heure'.[401] In Lorraine in 1589 'Johannes a Villa und Agathina des
Schneiders Francisci Weib, sagt, eine oder zwey Stunde vor Mitternacht were
die bequemste Zeit darzu'.[402] At North Berwick, in 1590, Agnes Sampson
arrived at the appointed place 'about eleven hours at even'.[403] The
Aberdeen witches in 1597 held their dance 'wpon Hallowewin last bypast, at
tuelff houris at ewin or thairby' (or more particularly) 'betuixt tuell &
ane houris at nycht'.[404] In 1598 the Lyons witch Françoise Secretain
'adioustoit qu'elle alloit tousiours au Sabbat enuiron la minuit, &
beaucoup d'autres sorciers, que i'ay eu en main, ont dit le mesme'. Antide
Colas, another Lyonnaise, went to the meeting on Christmas Eve between the
midnight mass and the mass at dawn.[405]

The only daylight meeting which can be identified as a Sabbath occurred at
Aberdeen, and may have been peculiar either to the locality or to the
May-Day festival; or it may have been simply the continuation of the
festival till the sun rose. Christen Michell and Bessie Thom were each
accused that 'vpon the Ruidday, thrie yeris sensyn bygane, airlie in the
morning, befoir sone rysing, thow convenit vpon Sanct Katherines Hill,
accumpaniet with a numer of thy devilische factioun and band, the Devill
your maister in cumpanie with yow'.[406]