6. _The Mark_

The Witches' Mark, or Devil's Mark, as it is indifferently called, is one
of the most important points in the identification of a witch, as the
infliction of it was often the final rite in the admission ceremonies. The
fact that any person bore such a mark was taken as incontrovertible proof
that the bearer was a witch.

There were two kinds of marks, which should be carefully differentiated,
one of which was clearly natural, the other probably artificial. Both were
said to be insensible to pain and not to bleed when pricked or pierced.
Local anaesthesia is vouched for in much of the evidence, which suggests
that there is a substratum of truth in the statements, but I can at present
offer no solution of this problem.

The writers on witchcraft, particularly the legal authorities, recognize
the value of the Mark as proof of witchcraft, and some differentiate
between the two forms; the witches themselves made a distinction between
the two, the natural being considered inferior to the artificial.

Reginald Scot in 1584 summarizes the evidence in a few words: 'The Diuell
giveth to euerie nouice a marke, either with his teeth or with his
clawes.'[282] The _Lawes against Witches and Conivration_, published 'by
authority' in 1645, state that 'their said Familiar hath some big or little
Teat upon their body, wher he sucketh them: and besides their sucking, the
Devil leaveth other markes upon their bodies, sometimes like a Blew-spot,
or Red-spot like a flea-biting'. Sir George Mackenzie, the famous Scotch
lawyer, describing in 1699 what did and did not legally constitute a witch,
says:

     'The Devils Mark useth to be a great Article with us, but it is not
     _per se_ found relevant, except it be confest by them, that they got
     that Mark with their own consent; _quo casu_, it is equivalent to a
     Paction. This Mark is given to them, as is alledg'd, by a Nip in any
     part of the Body, and it is blew. Delrio calls it _Stigma_, or
     Character, and alledges that it is sometimes like the impression of a
     Hare's foot, or the Foot of a Rat or Spider.'[283]

Forbes, writing in 1730, says:

     'On the meaner Proselytes the Devil fixes in some secret Part of their
     Bodies a Mark, as his Seal to know his own by; which is like a Flea
     Bite or blew Spot, or sometimes resembles a little Teat, and the Part
     so stamped doth ever after remain insensible, and doth not bleed, tho'
     never so much nipped or pricked by thrusting a Pin, Awl or Bodkin into
     it; but if the Covenanter be of better Rank, the Devil only draws
     Blood of the Party, or touches him or her in some Part of the Body
     without any visible Mark remaining.'[284]

The Mark proper appears to have been the coloured spot or design which
followed the infliction of a prick or nip by the claws or teeth of the
Devil on the person of the neophyte. The red mark is described as being
like a flea-bite, i.e. small and circular; the blue mark seems to have been
larger and more elaborate, apparently in some kind of design. From the
evidence five facts are clear: (1) that the mark was coloured, (2) that it
was permanent, (3) that it was caused by the pricking or tearing of the
skin, (4) that the operator passed his hand or fingers over the place, (5)
that the pain could be severe and might last a considerable time. Put
together in this way, the facts suggest tattooing.

Among the Aberdeen witches in 1597 Andro Man was accused that 'Christsunday
[the Devil] bit a mark in the third finger of thy right hand, whilk thou
has yet to show'; and Christen Mitchell also was accused that 'the Devil
gave thee a nip on the back of thy right hand, for a mark that thou was one
of his number'.[285] According to Boguet, writing in 1598, the witches of
Eastern France were usually marked on the left shoulder, and the mark was
in the shape of the foot or footprint of a hare, but he also gives some
exceptional cases:

     'L'epaule gauche est l'endroit, où plus ordinairement il marque les
     Sorciers. La marque des Sorciers est tantost come vne piste ou pied de
     lieure, & tantost d'autre façon. On en a veu vne, qui auoit vne figure
     rapportant en grandeur à vn petit denier, du centre de laquelle
     s'estendoient plusieurs filamens vers la circonference. La marque de
     la Belcuenotte, qui a esté brulée à Besançon, estoit au dessus de sa
     nature, vn peu plus bas que le nombril. Celle, dont Guillauma Proby
     d'Anchay se trouua marquée au col du costé droit, estoit de mesme de
     la grandeur d'vn petit denier, tirant sur le brun. Iean de Vaux auoit
     la sieñe au doz, & ressembloit à vn petit chien noir.'[286]

De Lancre in 1609 says that in the Basses-Pyrénées 'comme le Diable faict
sa marque, on sent vn peu de chaleur, qui penetre plus ou moins
profondement la chair, que plus ou moins il pince le lieu qu'il touche'. As
regards the position of the mark he says:

     'Il les egratigne tous auec le bras gauche, & les ongles de la main
     senestre. Et tout aussi tost prenant vne espingle d'or faux, il les
     marque le plus souuent dans le blãc de l'[oe]il gauche, & leur imprime
     vne marque qui semble vn petit crapaud' [elsewhere he says 'vne patte
     de crapaud']; 'par fois dans l'epaule & costé gauche, ou dans la
     cuisse, leur rompant & dechirant la peau & la chair iusques à effusiõ
     de sang; si bien que pendant trois mois ils ont de tres grandes
     douleurs.'[287]

Isobel Crawford of Irvine in 1618 had 'the devill's mark, quhilk was lyk
ane braid dyn spott, in the inner syd of hir left thie, about ane handbraid
under her lisk'.[288] The Lancashire witch, Margaret Johnson, in 1633,
'saith, that such Witches as have sharpe bones given them by the devill to
pricke them, have no papps nor duggs, but their devil receiveth blood from
the place, pricked with the bone, which witches are more grand witches than
any that have marks'.[289] The Yarmouth witch, tried in 1644, saw a tall
black man standing in the moonlight at her door: 'he told her, he must
first see her Hand; and then taking out something like a Pen-knife, he gave
it _a little Scratch_, so that Blood followed, and the _Mark_ remained to
that time.'[290] Rebecca Jones, an Essex witch tried in 1645, confessed
that 'there came one morning one to the doore and knocked, and that this
examinant going to the dore, shee saw there a very handsome young man, as
shee then thought but now shee thinkes it was the devill; who asked this
examinant how shee did, and desired to see her left wrist, which shee
shewed unto him: and he then tooke a pin from this examinant's owne sleeve,
and pricked her wrist twice, and there came out a drop of bloud, which he
took off with the top of his finger, and so departed'.[291] The
child-witch, Jonet Howat of Forfar, tried in 1661, said that 'the devil
kist hir and niped hir vpon one of hir shoulders, so as shoe hade great
paine for some tyme therafter'; later he came to her, and 'calling hir his
bony bird did kisse hir, and straiked her shoulder (quhich was niped) with
his hand, and that presently after that shoe was eased of hir former
paine'. Elspet Alexander, of the same Coven, was also marked on the
shoulder; four weeks later 'the divill straiked hir shoulder with his
fingers, and after that shoe hade ease in the place formerly niped by the
devill'.[292] The witch girls at Lille in 1661 stated that 'le Diable leur
fait quelque marque comme avec une aleine de fer en quelque partie du
corps'.[293] Marie Lamont of Innerkip in 1662 confessed voluntarily that
'the devill nipit her upon the right syd, qlk was very painful for a tym,
but yairefter he straikit it with his hand, and healed it; this she
confesses to be his mark'.[294] In Bute in 1662 'Margaret NcWilliam was
tryed for the merk there was 3 merks fund, one up her left leg, next hard
be the shine bone, another betwixt her shoulders a 3º ane uthyr up her
hensh, blew.... Kat Moore was tried, and it was found undernethe her richt
shoulder a little whyt unsensible spott'.[295] The Somerset witches, in
1664, were marked on the fingers; it was stated of Elizabeth Style that the
Devil 'prickt the fourth Finger of hir right hand, between the middle and
upper joynt (where the sign at the Examination remained)'; of Alice Duke,
that 'the Devil prickt the fourth finger of her right hand between the
middle and upper joynt (where the mark is yet to be seen)'; and of
Christian Green, that 'the Man in black prickt the fourth finger of her
Right-hand between the middle and upper joints, where the sign yet
remains'.[296] At Paisley in 1678 Annabil Stuart confessed 'that the Devil
took her by the Hand and nipped her Arm, which continued to be sore for
half an hour'.[297] At Borrowstowness the Devil took Margaret Pringle 'by
the right hand, whereby it was for eight days grievowslie pained; bot
having it twitched of new againe, it imediatelie becam haill'.[298] Of the
Renfrewshire Coven in 1696 little Thomas Lindsay received 'a Nip on the
Neck which continued sore for Ten days'; and John Reid had 'a Bite or Nipp
in his Loyn, which he found painfull for a Fortnight'.[299] At Pittenweem
in 1704 the 'young lass', Isobel Adams, confessed that the Devil 'put his
mark in her flesh which was very painful'.[300]

The other form of the Devil's Mark was the 'little Teat'. It occurred on
various parts of the body; was said to secrete milk and to give suck to the
familiars, both human and animal; and was sometimes cut off by the witch
before being searched. The descriptions of the 'teat' point to its being
that natural phenomenon, the supernumerary nipple. Cases of polymastia or
supernumerary breasts, and of polythelia or supernumerary nipples, are
constantly recorded by modern medical observers. 'These accessory
structures are usually situated on the chest wall, the upper part of the
abdominal wall, or in the axillae, but they have been met with on the
shoulder, the buttock, the thigh, and other extraordinary positions. As a
rule they are functionless.'[301] Polythelia occurs in both sexes;
according to Bruce, 'of 315 individuals taken indiscriminately and in
succession, 7.619 per cent. presented supernumerary nipple; 9.11 per cent.
of 207 men examined in succession presented supernumerary nipple; and 4.807
per cent. of 104 women.' He concludes that, 'according to present
observations at least, supernumerary nipples occur much more frequently in
the male than in the female.'[302] Cameron tabulates the positions of the
supernumerary nipple in 105 cases: '96 were situated in thorax, 5 in
axilla, 2 in back, 1 on shoulder, 1 outside of thigh.'[303] All writers on
the subject agree that the phenomenon is of more common occurrence than is
usually supposed, but that many cases pass unnoticed unless well marked
when in men or causing discomfort by functioning when in women. This view
is supported by the fact that, during the recent unparalleled opportunity
for the physical examination of large numbers of men, many cases have been
published in the _British Medical Journal_ for 1917 as occurring among
recruits for the army. The supernumerary nipple is usually very much
smaller than the normal; like the normal, it is a modification of cutaneous
tissue and is not attached to muscular tissue; its removal is a simple
operation, in fact it would be quite possible for an unskilled operator to
cut it off with a sharp knife. In women the supernumerary nipple is
observed to increase at the time of the periods; in some cases during
lactation so much milk is secreted as to make it a matter of indifference
whether the child is suckled at the normal nipples or at the supernumerary
one. In cases of polymastia the nipple is not always formed; the milk, when
secreted, issuing from a small opening. Though the nipple is congenital,
the supernumerary breast may develop, or at any rate become noticeable,
later; the theory being that the ducts carrying the secretion from the
supernumerary to the normal breast become blocked in some way, and that the
milk is thus exuded through the pore in the supernumerary breast. The
change in the case quoted by Cameron, as well as in the case of the witch
Rose Cullender, seems to have been caused by a strain.

Making allowance for the unscientific language of the recorders of the
witch trials, it will be seen that the descriptions of the 'witch-pap' or
'little Teat' exactly coincide with these anatomical facts. I give the
evidence below, the trials being in chronological order. It will be
observed that the cases are from England and New England only; if the
phenomena of polymastia and polythelia occurred in France and Scotland,
there are no records of the fact in the witch-trials of those countries.

Alice Gooderidge and her mother, Elizabeth Wright, of Stapenhill near
Burton-on-Trent, were tried in 1597:

     'The old woman they stript, and found behind her right sholder a thing
     much like the vdder of an ewe that giueth sucke with two teates, like
     vnto two great wartes, the one behinde vnder her armehole, the other
     a hand off towardes the top of her shoulder. Being demanded how long
     she had those teates, she aunswered she was borne so. Then did they
     search Alice Gooderige, and found vpon her belly, a hole of the
     bignesse of two pence, fresh and bloudy, as though some great wart had
     beene cut off the place.'[304]

The witch of Edmonton, tried in 1621:

     'The Bench commanded three women to search the body of Elizabeth
     Sawyer. They all three said, that they a little aboue the Fundiment of
     Elizabeth Sawyer found a thing like a Teate the bignesse of the little
     finger, and the length of half a finger, which was branched at the top
     like a teate, and seemed as though one had suckt it, and that the
     bottome thereof was blew, and the top of it was redde.'[305]

The greatest number of cases recorded in one place is in Essex during the
trials before Sir Matthew Hale in 1645:

     Anne Leech said 'that her imps did usually suck those teats which were
     found about the privie parts of her body. [Two women searched Mary
     Greenleife], and found that the said Mary had bigges or teates in her
     secret parts, not like emerods, nor in those places where women use to
     be troubled with them. The examinant, being asked how she came by
     those teats which were discovered in her secret parts, she saith she
     knows not unlesse she was born with them: but she never knew she had
     any such untill this time. [A woman searched Margaret Moone], she
     found three long teates or bigges in her secret parts, which seemed to
     have been lately sucked; and that they were not like pyles, for this
     informant knows well what they are, having been troubled with them
     herself. Upon the searching of her daughters, this informant found
     that two of them had biggs in their privy parts as the said Margaret
     their mother had. [Several women] were required to search Sarah
     Hating, the wife of William Hating; Elizabeth Harvy widow, and Marian
     Hocket widow, and upon her said search (being a midwife) found such
     marks or bigges, that she never saw in other women: for Sarah Hating
     had foure teats or bigges in those parts, almost an inch long, and as
     bigge as this informant's little finger: That the said Elizabeth Harvy
     had three such biggs, and about the same scantling: And that the said
     Marian Hocket had no such bigges; but was found in the same parts not
     like other honest women. Sarah Barton, the sister of the said Marian
     Hocket (also suspected of being a witch) said the said Marian had cut
     off her bigs, whereby she might have been suspected to have been a
     witch, and laid plaisters to those places.'[306] 'Another Evidence
     deposed that she once heard the said Margaret [Landish] say, that her
     Imps did usually suck two Teats near the privy parts.'[307]

In Huntingdonshire in 1646 John Clarke junior, a labourer, was tried for
witchcraft; John Browne, a tailor, deposed that he met Clarke on the road,
Clarke 'said he was in haste; for his Father and Mother were accused for
Witches, and that hee himselfe had beene searched: and this Informant
answered, and so have I. Then Clarke asked this Informant, whether any
thing were found about him, or not? he (this Informant) answered, that they
said there were marks: Clarke said againe, had you no more wit but to have
your marks found? I cut off mine three dayes before I was searched.'[308]
John Palmer of St. Albans (1649) confessed that 'upon his compact with the
Divel, hee received a flesh brand, or mark, upon his side, which gave suck
to two familiars'.[309] There were several cases in Yorkshire: In 1649
'they searched the body of the saide Mary Sikes, and founde upon the side
of her seate a redd lumpe about the biggnes of a nutt, being wett, and
that, when they wrung it with theire fingers, moisture came out of it like
lee. And they founde upon her left side neare her arme a litle lumpe like a
wart, and being puld out it stretcht about halfe an inch. And they further
say that they never sawe the like upon anie other weomen.'[310] In 1650
Frances Ward 'saith that she was one of the fower that searched Margaret
Morton, and found upon her two black spotts between her thigh and her body;
they were like a wart, but it was none. And the other was black on both
sides, an inch bread, and blew in the middest.'[311] At Scarborough in 1651

     'Margery Ffish, widdow, beinge commanded to searche the bodye of Anne
     Hunnam otherwise Marchant, who was accused for witchcraft; she, this
     informante, and Elizabeth Jackson, and Eliz. Dale, did accordingly
     searche the body of the saide Anne Hunnam, otherwise Marchant, and did
     finde a little blue spott upon her left side, into which spott this
     informant did thrust a pinne att which the sd. Ann Hunnam never moved
     or seemed to feel it, which spott grows, out of her ffleshe or skin at
     her waste of a great bignesse. Elizabeth Dale informeth upon oath,
     that she did, together with Margery Ffish, searche Ann Hunnam,
     otherwise Marchant, her bodye and saith that their was found on her
     left buttock a blue spott growing out of her fleshe or skin like a
     greate warte.[312]

The Kentish witch, Mary Read of Lenham, in 1652, 'had a visible Teat, under
her tongue, and did show it to many, and it was likewise seen by this
Observator.'[313] In the case of the Salisbury witch, Anne Bodenham, in
1652, 'Women searched the Witch in the Gaol, and they delivered on their
oaths at the Assises, that they found on her shoulder a certain mark or
Teat, about the length and bignesse of the Niple of a Womans breast, and
hollow and soft as a Niple, with a hole on the top of it: And searching
further, they likewise found in her secret place another Teat, soft, and
like the former on her shoulder.'[314] In Yorkshire again, in 1654,
Katherine Earle was accused, 'and the said Katherine hathe beene searched,
and a marke founde upon her in the likenesse of a papp'.[315] At St.
Albans, about 1660, there was a man-witch, who 'had like a Breast on his
side'.[316] In the same year at Kidderminster a widow, her two daughters,
and a man were brought to trial; 'the man had five teats, the mother three,
and the eldest daughter one. When they went to search the woman, none were
visible; one advised to lay them on their backs, and keep open their
mouths, and they would appear; and so they presently appeared in
sight.'[317] Alice Huson, of Burton Agnes, Yorks, in 1664, stated that 'I
have, I confess, a Witch-pap, which is sucked by the Unclean Spirit'.[318]
Abre Grinset, of Dunwich, Suffolk, in 1665, said, 'The Devil did appear in
the form of a Pretty handsom Young Man first, and since Appeareth to her in
the form of a blackish Gray Cat or Kitling, that it sucketh of a Tett
(which Searchers since saw in the place She mentioned).'[319] In the same
year, also in Suffolk, Rose Cullender was tried for witchcraft:

     'The searchers [six women] began at her head, and so stript her naked,
     and in the lower part of her belly they found a thing like a teat of
     an inch long, they questioned her about it, and she said, that she had
     got a strain by carrying of water which caused that excrescence. But
     upon narrower search, they found in her privy parts three more
     excrescencies or teats, but smaller than the former: this deponent
     farther saith, that in the long teat at the end thereof there was a
     little hole, and it appeared unto them as if it had been lately
     sucked, and upon the straining of it there issued out white milky
     matter.'[320]

Temperance Lloyd, a Devon witch, was tried in 1682: 'Upon search of her
body this informant did find in her secret parts, two teats hanging nigh
together like unto a piece of flesh that a child had suckt. And each of the
said teats was about an inch in length.'[321] Bridget Bishop, one of the
New England witches, was tried in 1692: 'A Jury of Women found a
preternatural Teat upon her Body; But upon a second search, within 3 or 4
hours, there was no such thing to be seen.'[322] Elizabeth Horner, another
Devon witch, tried in 1696, 'had something like a Nipple on her Shoulder,
which the Children [who gave evidence] said was sucked by a Toad'.[323]
Widow Coman, an Essex witch, died a natural death in 1699: 'Upon her death
I requested Becke the midwife to search her body in the presence of some
sober women, which she did and assured me she never saw the like in her
life that her fundament was open like a mouse-hole and that in it were two
long bigges out of which being pressed issued blood that they were neither
piles nor emrods for she knew both but excrescencies like to biggs with
nipples which seemed as if they had been frequently sucked.'[324] Elinor
Shaw and Mary Phillips were executed in Northampton in 1704 for witchcraft:
'The Infernal Imps did Nightly Suck each of them a large Teat, or pieces of
red Flesh in their Privy Parts.'[325]

The positions of the marks are worth noting. Of the coloured mark it will
be seen from the evidence given above that there were certain well-defined
positions, which is in itself a strong suggestion of the artificial
character of this mark. In France the usual position was the left shoulder;
in the Basses-Pyrénées the left eye, the left side, and the thigh were also
commonly marked; the variations given by Boguet are the abdomen, the back,
and the right side of the neck. In England it seems that only the hand and
wrist were marked; in Somerset the exact position was between the upper and
middle joints of the fourth finger of the right hand, probably the
'ring-finger', but whether on the outer or inner surface is not recorded.
In Scotland the position is very varied, the right hand, the right side,
the shoulder, the back, the neck, and the loin; at Aberdeen the position on
the right hand is still further defined as being on the back and on the
third finger, i.e. the 'ring-finger'.

Reginald Scot does not distinguish between the two kinds of marks, when he
says that if the witch 'have anie privie marke under hir arme pokes, under
hir haire, under hir lip, or in her buttocke, or in her privities; it is a
presumption sufficient for the judge to proceed to give sentence of death
upon her'.[326] But from the positions in which supernumerary nipples are
known to occur, it would seem that he is speaking of the 'little Teat' and
not of the coloured mark. In six out of the thirty-two cases of
supernumerary nipple cited above, the number of nipples is not given;
though from the context it would appear that more than one was often found
on each of the accused. If, therefore, we allow two apiece for those cases
not definitely specified, there were sixty-three such nipples, an average
roughly of two to each person; the number varying, however, from one to
five (this last being a man). The position of the nipple on the body is
given in forty-five out of the sixty-three cases: abdomen 2, axilla 1,
buttock 1, fundament 3, groin 2, pudenda 30, shoulder 3, side 3, under
tongue 1. In writing of supernumerary nipples and _mammae erraticae_
Williams quotes cases recorded by modern observers, in which the accessory
organ occurred on the abdomen, axilla, inguinal region, outer side of
thigh, shoulder, and face.[327]