5. _The Feast_

The feast, like the rest of the ritual, varied in detail in different
places. It took place either indoors or out according to the climate and
the season; in Southern France almost invariably in the open air, in
Scotland and Sweden almost always under cover; in England sometimes one,
sometimes the other. Where it was usual to have it in the open, tables were
carried out and the food laid upon them; indoor feasts were always spread
on tables; but in the English accounts of the open-air meal the cloth was
spread, picnic-fashion, on the ground. The food was supplied in different
ways; sometimes entirely by the devil, sometimes entirely by one member of
the community, and sometimes--picnic-fashion again--all the company brought
their own provisions. Consequently the quality of the food varied
considerably; on some occasions it was very good, on others very homely.
But no matter who provided it, the thanks of the feasters were solemnly and
reverently given to the Master, to whose power the production of all food
was due.

In a certain number of cases it is said that the food eaten at the feasts
was of an unsatisfying nature. This statement is usually made in the
general descriptions given by contemporary writers; it is rarely found in
the personal confessions. When it does so occur, it is worth noting that
the witch is generally a young girl. If this were always the case, it would
be quite possible that then, as now, dancing and excitement had a great
effect on the appetite, and that the ordinary amount of food would appear
insufficient.

The taboo on salt is interesting, but it does not appear to have been by
any means universal. It does not seem to occur at all in Great Britain,
where the food at the feasts was quite normal.

Some authorities appear to think that the witches ate the best of
everything. 'They sit to Table where no delicate meats are wanting to
gratifie their Appetites, all dainties being brought in the twinckling of
an Eye, by those spirits that attend the Assembly'.[541] Though this is
dramatically expressed it is confirmed by the statements of the witches
themselves. The Lancashire witches had a great feast when they met in
Malking Tower to consult as to the rescue of Mother Demdike.

     'The persons aforesaid had to their dinners Beefe, Bacon, and roasted
     Mutton; which Mutton (as this Examinates said brother said) was of a
     Wether of Christopher Swyers of Barley: which Wether was brought in
     the night before into this Examinates mothers house by the said Iames
     Deuice, this Examinates said brother: and in this Examinates sight
     killed and eaten.... And before their said parting away, they all
     appointed to meete at the said Prestons wiues house that day
     twelue-moneths; at which time the said Prestons wife promised to make
     them a great Feast.'[542]

The feast of the Faversham witches was also indoors. 'Joan Cariden
confessed that Goodwife Hott told her within these two daies that there was
a great meeting at Goodwife Panterys house, and that Goodwife Dodson was
there, and that Goodwife Gardner should have been there, but did not come,
and the Divell sat at the upper end of the Table.'[543] This was always the
Devil's place at the feast, and beside him sat the chief of the women
witches. The Somerset trials give more detail than any of the other English
cases. Elizabeth Style said that 'at their meeting they have usually Wine
or good Beer, Cakes, Meat or the like. They eat and drink really when they
meet in their bodies, dance also and have Musick. The Man in black sits at
the higher end, and _Anne Bishop_ usually next him. He useth some words
before meat, and none after, his voice is audible, but very low.'[544] She
enters into a little more detail in another place: 'They had Wine, Cakes,
and Roastmeat (all brought by the Man in black) which they did eat and
drink. They danced and were merry, and were bodily there, and in their
Clothes.'[545] Alice Duke gave a similar account: 'All sate down, a white
Cloth being spread on the ground, and did drink Wine, and eat Cakes and
Meat.'[546] The Scotch trials show that it was usually the witches who
entertained the Master and the rest of the band. Alison Peirson, whose
adventures among the fairies are very interesting, stated that a man in
green 'apperit to hir, ane lustie mane, with mony mene and wemen with him:
And that scho sanit her and prayit, and past with thame fordir nor scho
could tell; and saw with thame pypeing and mirrynes and gude scheir, and
wes careit to Lowtheane, and saw wyne punchounis with tassis with
thame'.[547] On another occasion a very considerable meeting took place 'in
an old house near Castle Semple, where a splendid feast was prepared, which
pleased the royal visitor so much, that he complimented his entertainers
for their hospitality, and endearingly addressed them as "his
bairns"'.[548] The Forfar witches had many feasts; Helen Guthrie says of
one occasion:

     'They went to Mary Rynd's house and sat doune together at the table,
     the divell being present at the head of it; and some of them went to
     Johne Benny's house, he being a brewer, and brought ale from hence ...
     and others of them went to Alexander Hieche's and brought aqua vitae
     from thence, and thus made themselfes mirrie; and the divill made much
     of them all, but especiallie of Mary Rynd, and he kist them all except
     the said Helen herselfe, whose hand onlie he kist; and shee and Jonet
     Stout satt opposite one to another at the table.'[549]

Of the meeting at Muryknowes there are several accounts. The first is by
little Jonet Howat, Helen Guthrie's young daughter: 'At this meiting there
wer about twenty persones present with the divill, and they daunced
togither and eat togither, having bieff, bread, and ale, and shoe did eat
and drink with them hir self, bot hir bellie was not filled, and shoe
filled the drink to the rest of the company.'[550] Elspet Alexander
confirms this statement, 'The divill and the witches did drinke together
having flesh, bread, and aile';[551] and so also does the Jonet Stout who
sat opposite to Helen Guthrie at the table, 'The divill and the said
witches did eat and drinke, having flesh, bread, and aile upon ane table,
and Joanet Huit was caper and filled the drinke'.[552] On one occasion they
tried to wreck the Bridge of Cortaquhie; 'when we had done, Elspet [Bruce]
gaive the divell ane goose in hir own house, and he dated hir mor than them
all, because shee was ane prettie woman.'[553] The Kinross-shire witches
obtained their food from the Devil, and this is one of the few instances of
complaints as to the quality of it. 'Sathan gave you [Robert Wilson] both
meat and drink sundry times, but it never did you any good';[554] and Janet
Brugh 'confessed that ye got rough bread and sour drink from Sathan at the
Bents of Balruddrie'.[555] According to Marie Lamont, 'the devill came to
Kattrein Scott's house, in the midst of the night. He gave them wyn to
drink, and wheat bread to eat, and they warr all very mirrie.'[556] Isobel
Gowdie's confession gives a wealth of detail as usual:

     'We would go to several houses in the night time. We were at
     Candlemas last in Grangehill, where we got meat and drink enough. The
     Devil sat at the head of the table, and all the Coven about. That
     night he desired Alexander Elder in Earlseat to say the grace before
     meat, which he did; and is this:[557] "We eat this meat in the Devil's
     name" [etc.]. And then we began to eat. And when we had ended eating,
     we looked steadfastly to the Devil, and bowing ourselves to him, we
     said to the Devil, We thank thee, our Lord, for this.--We killed an
     ox, in Burgie, about the dawing of the day, and we brought the ox with
     us home to Aulderne, and did eat all amongst us in an house in
     Aulderne, and feasted on it.'[558]

At Borrowstowness the witches went to different houses for their feasts,
which seem to have been supplied partly by the hostess, partly by the Devil
and the guests.

     'Ye and each person of you was at several meetings with the devil in
     the links of Borrowstowness, and in the house of you Bessie Vickar,
     and ye did eat and drink with the devil, and with one another, and
     with witches in her house in the night time; and the devil and the
     said William Craw brought the ale which ye drank, extending to about
     seven gallons, from the house of Elizabeth Hamilton.'[559]

In 1692 Goodwife Foster of Salem gave a rather charming description of the
picnic feast with the Coven from Andover:

     'I enquired what she did for Victuals' [at the meeting]; 'She answered
     that she carried Bread and Cheese in her pocket, and that she and the
     Andover Company came to the Village before the Meeting began, and sat
     down together under a tree, and eat their food, and that she drank
     water out of a Brook to quench her thirst.'[560]

The Continental evidence varies very little from the British. Except in a
few details, the main facts are practically the same. De Lancre summarizes
the evidence which he himself collected, and contrasts it with what other
authorities said on the subject:

     'Les liures disent que les sorciers mangent au Sabbat de ce que le
     Diable leur a appresté: mais bien souu[~e]t il ne s'y trouue que des
     viandes qu'ils ont porté eux mesmes. Parfois il y a plusieurs tables
     seruies de bons viures, & d'autres fois de tres meschans: & à table on
     se sied selon sa qualité, ayant chacun son Demon assis auprés, &
     parfois vis à vis. Ils benissent leur table inuoquant Beelzebub, & le
     tenant pour celui qui leur faict ce bien.'[561]

The young man-witch, Isaac de Queyran, told de Lancre that the witches sat
at a table with the Black Man at the end, and had bread and meat which was
spread on a cloth.[562] The evidence at the trial of Louis Gaufredy at Aix
in 1610 gives other details, though the eating of children's flesh is
probably an exaggeration:

     'They prouide a banquet, setting three tables according to the three
     diuersities of the people above named. They that haue the charge of
     bread, doe bring in bread made of corne. The drink which they haue is
     Malmsey. The meate they ordinarily eate is the flesh of young
     children, which they cooke and make ready in the Synagogue, sometimes
     bringing them thither aliue by stealing them from those houses where
     they haue opportunity to come. They haue no vse of kniues at table for
     feare least they should be laid a crosse. They haue also no
     salt.'[563]

Boguet also collected a considerable amount of information from the witches
who fell into his hands:

     'Les Sorciers, apres s'estre veautrez parmi les plaisirs immondes de
     la chair, banquettent & se festoient: leurs banquets estans composez
     de plusieurs sortes de viandes, selon les lieux, & qualitez des
     personnes. Par deçà la table estoit couuerte de beurre, de fromage, &
     de chair. Clauda Ianguillaume, Iaquema Paget, & quelques autres
     adioustoient qu'il y auoit vne grande chaudiere sur le feu, dans
     laquelle chacun alloit prendre de la chair. On y boit aussi du vin, &
     le plus souuent de l'eau.... Antoine Tornier a confessé qu'elle en
     auoit beu [le vin] dans vn goubelet de bois; les autres parloient
     seulement d'eau. Mais il n'y a iamais sel en ces repas.... Les
     Sorciers auant que de prendre leur repas benissent la table, mais auec
     des parolles remplies de blasphemes, faisans Beelzebub autheur &
     conseruateur de toutes choses.... Ils accordent tous, qu'il n'y a
     point de gout aux viandes qu'ils mangent au Sabbat, & que la chair
     n'est autre chair que de cheual. Et adioustent en outre, que lors
     qu'ils sortent de table, ils sont aussi affamez que quand ils
     entrent. Antide Colas racontoit particulierement que les viandes
     estoient froides.... Toutesfois il faut croire que bien souuent l'on
     mange au Sabbat à bon escient, & non par fantaisie &
     imagination.'[564]

The cold food occurs also in the accusation against a Belgian witch,
Elizabeth Vlamynx, in 1595: 'Vous-même vous avez apporté aux convives un
hochepot [hutsepot] froid, que vous aviez préparé d'avance.'[565]

In Sweden the witches collected the food and sent it to the Devil, who gave
them as much of it as he thought fit. The feast was always held indoors in
the house known as Blockula.

     'In a huge large Room of this House, they said, there stood a very
     long Table, at which the Witches did sit down.... They sate down to
     Table, and those that the Devil esteemed most, were placed nearest to
     him, but the Children must stand at the door, where he himself gives
     them meat and drink. The diet they did use to have there, was, they
     said, Broth with Colworts and Bacon in it, Oatmeal, Bread spread with
     Butter, Milk and Cheese. And they added that sometimes it tasted very
     well, and sometimes very ill.'[566]