2. _The Domestic Familiar_

Forbes, the great Scotch lawyer, says that 'to some he [the Devil] gives
certain Spirits or Imps to correspond with, and serve them as their
Familiars, known to them by some odd Names, to which they answer when
called. These Imps are said to be kept in Pots or other Vessels.'[839]
Though the domestic familiar is thus mentioned in the law of Scotland, it
never occurs in the trials. It is confined so strictly to England that
Hutchinson is able to say 'I meet with little mention of _Imps_ in any
Country but ours, where the Law makes the feeding, suckling, or rewarding
of them to be Felony'.[840] It is not found north of Lancashire, and the
chief records are in Essex, Suffolk, and the other Eastern counties.

The domestic familiar was always a small animal, was fed in a special
manner on bread and milk and blood, and was kept, as Forbes points out, in
a box or earthen pot on a bed of wool. It was used for working magic on the
persons and property of other people, never for divining. Giffard records
the general belief: 'The witches have their spirits, some hath one, some
hath more, as two, three, foure, or five, some in one likenesse, and some
in another, as like cats, weasils, toades, or mise, whom they nourish with
milke or with a chicken, or by letting them suck now and then a drop of
bloud.'[841]

In the earlier trials the witches confessed to pricking the hands or face
and giving the resulting drop or drops of blood to the familiar. In the
later trials this has developed into the sucking of the witch's blood by
the familiar; and the supernumerary nipple, which was so marked a feature
of the English witches, was popularly supposed to be caused by such
sucking. It is more probable, however, that the witch who was possessed of
a supernumerary nipple would regard it as something supernatural, and would
use it to nourish a supernatural animal.

Elizabeth Francis, tried at Chelmsford in 1556,

     'learned this arte of witchcraft of hyr grandmother whose nam mother
     Eue. Item when shee taughte it her, she counseiled her to renounce God
     and his worde and to geue of her bloudde to Sathan (as she termed it)
     whyche she delyuered her in the lykenesse of a whyte spotted Catte,
     and taughte her to feede the sayde Catte with breade and mylke, and
     she dyd so, also she taughte her to cal it by the name of Sathan and
     to kepe it in a basket. Item that euery tyme that he did any thynge
     for her, she sayde that he required a drop of bloude, which she gaue
     him by prycking herselfe, sometime in one place and then in an other.
     When shee had kept this Cat by the space of XV or XVI yeare, and as
     some saye (though vntruly) beinge wery of it, she came to one mother
     Waterhouse her neyghbour, she brought her this cat in her apron and
     taught her as she was instructed by her grandmother Eue, telling her
     that she must cal him Sathan and geue him of her bloude and breade and
     milke as before.--Mother Waterhouse receyued this cat of this Frances
     wife in the order as is before sayde. She (to trye him what he coulde
     do) wyld him to kyll a hog of her owne, which he dyd, and she gaue him
     for his labour a chicken, which he fyrste required of her and a drop
     of her blod. And thys she gaue him at all times when he dyd anythynge
     for her, by pricking her hand or face and puttinge the bloud to hys
     mouth whyche he sucked, and forthwith wold lye downe in hys pot
     againe, wherein she kepte him. Another tym she rewarded hym as before,
     wyth a chicken and a droppe of her bloud, which chicken he eate vp
     cleane as he didde al the rest, and she cold fynde remaining neyther
     bones nor fethers. Also she said that when she wolde wyl him to do any
     thinge for her, she wolde say her Pater noster in laten. Item, this
     mother Waterhouse confessed that shee fyrst turned this Cat into a
     tode by this meanes, she kept the cat a great while in woll in a pot,
     and at length being moued by pouertie to occupie the woll, she praied
     in the name of the father and of the sonne, and of the holy ghost that
     it wold turne into a tode, and forthwith it was turned into a tode,
     and so kept it in the pot without woll.'[842]

In 1579 at Windsor--

     'one Mother Dutton dwellyng in Cleworthe Parishe keepeth a Spirite or
     Feende in the likenesse of a Toade, and fedeth the same Feende liyng
     in a border of greene Hearbes, within her Garden, with blood whiche
     she causeth to issue from her owne flancke. Mother Deuell, dwellyng
     nigh the Ponde in Windesore, hath a Spirite in the shape of a Blacke
     Catte, and calleth it Gille, whereby she is aided in her Witchcrafte,
     and she daiely feedeth it with Milke, mingled with her owne bloud.
     Mother Margaret, dwellying in the Almeshouse at Windesore, dooeth
     feede a Kitlyng or Feende by her named Ginnie, with crummes of bread
     and her owne blood. The saied Elizabeth Stile, of her self confesseth
     that she the same Elizabeth kept a Ratte, beeyng in very deede a
     wicked Spirite, namyng it Philip, and that she fedde the same Ratte
     with bloode, issuing from her right handwrest, the markes whereof
     euidently remaine.'[843]

At St. Osyth in Essex in 1582 Thomas Rabbet, aged eight, said that his
mother Ursley Kemp 'hath foure seuerall spirites, the one called Tyffin,
the other Tittey, the third Pigine, and the fourth Iacke: and being asked
of what colours they were, saith, that Tyttey is like a little grey
Cat,[844] Tyffin is like a white lambe, Pygine is black like a Toad, and
Iacke is blacke like a Cat. And hee saith, hee hath seen his mother at
times to giue th[~e] beere to drinke, and of a white Lofe or Cake to eate,
and saith that in the night time the said spirites will come to his mother,
and sucke blood of her vpon her armes and other places of her body.' Febey
Hunt, stepdaughter of Ales Hunt, one of the accused witches, stated that
'shee hath seen her mother to haue two little thinges like horses,[845] the
one white, the other blacke, the which shee kept in a little lowe earthen
pot with woll, colour white and blacke, and that they stoode in her chamber
by her bed side, and saith, that shee hath seene her mother to feede them
with milke'. Ales Hunt herself said that 'shee had within VI. dayes before
this examination two spirits, like unto little Coltes, the one blacke, and
the other white: And saith she called them by the names of _Iacke_ and
_Robbin_. This Examinate saith that her sister (named Margerie Sammon) hath
also two spirites like Toades, the one called _Tom_, and the other
_Robbyn_.' Ursley Kemp confessed that 'about a quarter of a yere past, she
went vnto mother Bennets house for a messe of milke, the which shee had
promised her: But at her comming this examinate saith shee knocked at her
dore, and no bodie made her any answere, whereupon shee went to her chamber
windowe and looked in therat, saying, ho, ho, mother Bennet are you at
home: And casting her eyes aside, shee saw a spirit lift up a clothe,
lying ouer a pot, looking much lik a Ferret. And it being asked of this
examinate why the spirite did looke vpon her, shee said it was hungrie'.
Elizabeth Bennet acknowledged that she had two 'spirits, one called
_Suckin_, being blacke like a Dogge, the other called _Lierd_, beeing red
like a Lion. Suckin this examinat saith is a hee, and the other a shee.
Many tymes they drinke of her milke bowle. And when, and as often as they
did drinke of the mylke: This Examynate saith they went into the sayd
earthen pot, and lay in the wooll.' Ursley Kemp also gave evidence
concerning Ales Hunt's familiars: 'About the foureteene or fifteene day of
Januarie last, shee went to the house of William Hunt to see howe his wife
did, and shee being from home, shee called at her chamber window and looked
in, and then espied a spirite to looke out of a potcharde from vnder a
clothe, the nose thereof beeing browne like vnto a Ferret.'[846] In 1588 in
Essex an old woman, whose name is not given,

     'confessed all: Which was this in effect: that she had three spirits:
     one like a cat, which she called Lightfoot, another like a toad, which
     she called Lunch, the third like a Weasill, which she called
     Makeshift. This Lightfoot, she said, one mother Barlie of W. solde her
     aboue sixteene yeares agoe, for an ouen cake, and told her the Cat
     would doe her good seruice, if she woulde, she might send her of her
     errand: this Cat was with her but a while, but the Weasill and the
     Toad came and offered their seruice: The Cat would kill kine, the
     Weasil would kill horses, the Toad would plague men in their
     bodies.--There was one olde mother W. of great T. which had a spirite
     like a Weasill: she was offended highlie with one H. M. home she went,
     and called forth her spirite, which lay in a pot of woll vnder her
     bed, she willed him to goe plague the man; he required what she would
     give him. She said she would give him a cocke, which she did.' Another
     Mother W. 'sayd she had a spirit in the likenesse of a yellow dun
     cat'.[847]

In Lancashire in 1613 old mother Demdike confessed that 'vpon a Sabbath day
in the morning, this Examinate hauing a litle Child vpon her knee, and she
being in a slumber, the sayd Spirit appeared vnto her in the likenes of a
browne Dogg, forcing himselfe to her knee, to get blood vnder her left
Arme: and she being without any apparrell sauing her Smocke, the said
Deuill did get blood vnder her left arme'.[848] Of the witches who plagued
the Fairfax family at Fewstone in 1621, five had domestic familiars:
Margaret Waite's was 'a deformed thing with many feet, black of colour,
rough with hair, the bigness of a cat'; her daughter, Margaret Waite, had
as 'her spirit, a white cat spotted with black, and named Inges'; Jennet
Dibble had 'her spirit in the shape of a great black cat called Gibbe,
which hath attended her now above 40 years'; Dibble's daughter, Margaret
Thorpe, had a 'familiar in the shape of a bird, yellow of colour, about the
bigness of a crow--the name of it is Tewhit'; Elizabeth Dickenson's spirit
was 'in the likeness of a white cat, which she calleth Fillie, she hath
kept it twenty years'.[849] The witch of Edmonton, Elizabeth Sawyer, in
1621, said: 'It is eight yeares since our first acquaintance, and three
times in the weeke, the Diuell would come and see mee; he would come
sometimes in the morning, and sometimes in the evening. Alwayes in the
shape of a dogge, and of two collars, sometimes of blacke and sometimes of
white. I gaue him leaue to sucke of my bloud, the which hee asked of me.
When he came barking to mee he then had done the mischiefe that I did bid
him to doe for me. I did call the Diuell by the name of Tom. I did stroake
him on the backe, and then he would becke vnto me, and wagge his tayle as
being therewith contented.'[850] Margaret Johnson, another Lancashire witch
in 1633, 'alsoe saith, yt when her devill did come to sucke her pappe, hee
usually came to her in ye liknes of a cat, sometymes of one colour, and
sometymes on (_sic_) an other. And yt since this trouble befell her, her
spirit hath left her, and shee never sawe him since.'[851]

From 1645 to 1647 are the chief records of the witch trials of Essex and
the eastern counties, celebrated as the scene of Matthew Hopkins's work.
The Essex trials took place in 1645: John Sterne, Hopkins's assistant,
deposed that when watching Elizabeth Clarke,

     'the said Elizabeth desired this informant, and the rest that were in
     the roome with her, to sit downe, and said, shee would shew this
     informant and the rest some of her impes: and within halfe an houre
     there appeared a white thing in the likeness of a cat, but not
     altogether so big: and being asked, if she would not be afraid of her
     impes, the said Elizabeth answered, "What, do yee think I am afraid of
     my children?" And that shee called the name of that white impe, Hoult.
     And this informant further saith, That presently after there appeared
     another white impe, with red spots, as big as a small dog, which shee
     then called Jarmara: and that immediately after, there appeared at the
     threshold of the doore another impe about the bignesse of the first,
     but did presently vanish away. And then the said Elizabeth being
     asked, if any more impes would come? she answered, "That Vinegar Tom
     would come by and by". And forthwith there appeared another in the
     likenesse of a dumb dogge, somewhat bigger than any of the former. And
     the said Elizabeth also told this informant, that shee had three impes
     from her mother, which were of a browne colour, and two from the old
     beldam Weste; and that there had five [? four] impes appeared, but
     shee had one more, called Sack and Sugar. And the said Elizabeth
     further confessed to this informant, that shee had one impe for which
     she would fight up to the knees in bloud, before shee would lose it;
     and that her impes did commonly suck on the old beldam Weste, and that
     the said beldam's impes did suck on her the said Elizabeth
     likewise.--Anne Leech saith, That she had a grey impe sent to her, and
     that this examinant, together with the said Elizabeth Clark, and
     Elizabeth the wife of Edward Gooding, did about a yeer since, send
     their imps to kill a black cowe and a white cowe of Mr. Edwards, which
     was done accordingly. And this examinant saith, that she sent her grey
     impe, Elizabeth Clark a black imp, and Elizabeth Gooding a white imp.
     And this examinant confesseth, that she and the said Elizabeth
     Gooding, sent either of them an imp to destroy the childe of the said
     Mr. Edwards; this examinant's imp being then a white one, and
     Elizabeth Gooding's a black imp; and that about thirty yeers since,
     this examinant had the said white imp and two others, a grey and a
     black imp of one Anne, the wife of Robert Pearce of Stoak in Suffolk,
     being her brother; and that these imps went commonly from one to
     another, and did mischief where ever they went; and that when this
     examinant did not send and imploy them abroad to do mischief, she had
     not her health, but when they were imployed, she was healthfull and
     well, and that these imps did usually suck those teats which were
     found about the privie parts of her body.--Hellen Clark confesseth,
     that about six weeks since, the Devill appeared to her in her house,
     in the likenesse of a white dog, and that she calleth that familiar
     Elimanzer; and that this examinant hath often fed him with milk
     pottage.--Rebecca West saith, that about a moneth since, the aforesaid
     Anne Leech, Elizabeth Gooding, Hellen Clark, Anne West, and this
     examinant, met all together at the house of the aforesaid Elizabeth
     Clark in Mannyntree, where they spent some time in praying unto their
     familiars, and every one in order went to prayers; afterwards some of
     them read in a book, the book being Elizabeth Clarks; and this
     examinant saith, that forthwith their familiars appeared, and every
     one of them made their severall propositions to those familiars, what
     every one of them desired to have effected.--The Information of
     Matthew Hopkins, Gent. taken upon oath before the said Justices. This
     informant saith, That being lately at Colchester, he went to the
     castle, where the said Rebecca Weste, with the other five, are secured
     until the next gaole delivery: and this informant going to Rebecca
     Weste, and asking her how shee came first to be a witch, the said
     Rebecca told this informant, that about a yeare since, or thereabouts,
     halfe an houre before sun-set, the said Anne Weste (her mother)
     carried the said Rebecca Weste towards Mannintree (which is about a
     small mile from the place where the said Anne dwelt) and the said
     Rebecca told this informant, that as her mother and shee walked
     together, the said Anne told the said Rebecca, shee must keepe secret
     whatsoever shee saw, whither they were then going; and the said
     Rebecca promised so to doe; and the said Rebecca told this informant,
     that her mother and shee went to the house of the aforesaid Elizabeth
     Clarke, where at their comming in they found the aforesaid Anne Leech,
     widow, Elizabeth Gooding, Hellen Clarke, and the house-keeper
     Elizabeth Clarke, and that forthwith the Devill appeared to them in
     the shape of a dogge; afterwards in the shape of two kitlyns; then in
     the shape of two dogges; and that the said familiars did doe homage in
     the first place to the said Elizabeth Clarke, and skipped up into her
     lap and kissed her; and then went and kissed all that were in the
     roome, except the said Rebecca: and the said Rebecca told this
     informant, that immediately one of the company asked the said Anne her
     mother, if shee had acquainted her daughter (the said Rebecca) with
     the businesse. [Rebecca then took an oath of secrecy]; after she had
     consented to all these things, the Devill came into her lap, and
     kissed her, and promised to doe for her what she could desire.--The
     Information of Elizabeth Otley of Wyvenhoe, taken upon oath before the
     said justices. This informant saith, that Alice Dixon, who now stands
     committed for a suspected witch, did in the presence of Mary Johnson
     of the same town, charge and accuse the said Mary Johnson to be the
     death of this informant's child, saying, that the said Mary Johnson
     did carry an impe in her pocket to this informant's house, and put the
     said impe into the house, at an hole in the doore, bidding it go rock
     the cradle, and do the businesse she sent it about.--The Information
     of Joseph Long, Minister of Clacton in the County of Essex, taken
     before the said Justices. This informant saith, that Anne the wife of
     John Cooper of Clacton aforesaid, being accused for a witch: Confessed
     unto this informant, that she the said Anne hath had three black impes
     suckled on the lower parts of her body; called by the names of Wynowe,
     Jeso, and Panu. And the said Anne further confessed unto this
     informant, that she the said Anne offered to give unto her daughter
     Sarah Cooper an impe in the likenes of a gray kite [kit], to suck on
     the said Sarah; which impes name the said Anne called Tom boy; and
     told the said Sarah, there was a cat for her.--This informant Henry
     Cornwall saith, that the said Margaret [Moone] did confesse to him
     that she had twelve impes, and called them by their names; of which he
     remembers onely these following: Jesus, Jockey, Sandy, Mrit.
     Elizabeth, and Collyn.--The information of Francis Milles, taken upon
     oath before the said Justices. This informant saith, that she asking
     the said Margaret [Moone] for her impes, which sucked those teats; she
     said, if she might have some bread and beere, she would call her said
     impes; which being given unto her, she put the bread into the beere,
     and set it against an hole in the wall, and made a circle round the
     pot, and then cried, Come Christ, come Christ, come Mounsier, come
     Mounsier: And no impe appearing, she cried out and said, she had
     devilish daughters, which had carried her impes away in a white bagge,
     and wished they might be searched.--The information of Francis Stock,
     and John Felgate, taken upon oath before the said Justices. The said
     Francis and John say, that the said Sarah Barton, told them, that the
     said Marian [Hocket] had given and delivered unto her the said Sarah
     three imps, and that the said Marian called them by the names of
     Littleman, Pretty-man, and Dainty.--This examinant, Elizabeth Harvie
     saith, that about halfe a yeer since, the said Marian Hocket brought
     three things to her house, two of them being smaller than mouses, and
     the other somewhat bigger and longer; and that the said Marian told
     this examinant they were pretty things, and would do her and this
     examinant good, if shee this examinant would keep them.--Rose
     Hallybread saith, that about fifteen or sixteen yeers since, there was
     an imp brought to her house by one Goodwife Hagtree, which imp this
     examinant entertained, fed it with oatmeale, and suckled it on her
     body, for the space of a yeer and a halfe, or thereabouts, and then
     lost it: And this examinant further saith, that about half a yeer
     since, one Joyce Boanes (who is now also accused for Witchcraft),
     brought to this examinants house another imp, in the likenesse of a
     small grey bird, which this examinant received. And this examinant
     further saith, that about eight dayes since, Susan Cock, Margaret
     Landish, and Joyce Boanes, (all which stand now suspected for
     Witchcraft) brought to this examinants house each of them an imp, (in
     all three) to which this examinant added one of her own imps; and then
     the said Joyce Boanes carryed the said four imps to the house of one
     Robert Turner, to torment his servant.--Joyce Boanes saith, that about
     thirteen yeers since, shee had two imps which came into the bed to her
     in the likenesse of mouses, and that they sucked on this examinants
     body. And this examinant also saith, that she carried one of her said
     imps, called Rug, to the house of the said Rose Hallybread; and that
     her said imp Rug, with the three imps of the said Rose Hallybread,
     Susan Cock, and Margaret Landish, each of them sending one, were
     carried by this examinant from the house of the said Rose Hallybread,
     to the house of the said Robert Turner to kill the servant of the said
     Robert.--Susan Cock saith, that about three or four yeeres since, one
     Margery Stoakes, this examinants mother, lying upon her death-bed, and
     this examinant comming to visit her, shee the said Margery desired
     this examinant privately to give entertainment to two of her imps, and
     withall told this examinant, they would do this examinant good: And
     this examinant saith, that the same night her said mother dyed, the
     said two imps came to her accordingly, and sucked on her body: And
     this examinant saith, that one of the said imps was like a mouse, and
     the name of that was Susan; that the other was of a yellow colour,
     about the bigness of a cat; and that the name of that imp was
     Besse.--Rebecca Jones saith, that as shee was going to St. Osyth
     (where this examinant doth now dwell) to sell her said masters butter,
     a man met with her, being in a ragged sute, and having such great
     eyes, that this examinant was much afraid of him; who came to this
     examinant, and gave her three things like to moules, having foure feet
     a piece, but without tayles, and of a black colour, and bid this
     examinant nurse the said three things, untill he did desire them
     againe; And this examinant asked the said man, what she should give
     them to eate, and he told this examinant milke, and that they would
     not hurt her, and wished her not to be afraid of them. And the said
     man told this examinant, that those three things which he gave her,
     would avenge her on her enemies, and bid her murther some, but not too
     many, and he would forgive her; and then went away from this
     examinant. And this examinant saith, that the names of her three imps
     were Margaret, Amie, and Susan. And that a while after, this examinant
     and one Joyce Boanes, now in prison, did send each of them an impe to
     kill one Thomas Bumstead of St. Osyth: And that the impe which the
     said Joyce Boanes sent was a dund one like unto a mouse.--Johan Cooper
     saith, That she hath been a witch about twenty yeers, and hath three
     familiars, two like mouses, and the third like a frog; the names of
     the two like mouses are Jack, and the other Prickeare, and the name of
     the third, like a frog, is Frog.--Anne Cate saith, That she hath four
     familiars, which shee had from her mother, about two and twenty yeeres
     since, and that the names of the said imps are James, Prickeare,
     Robyn, and Sparrow: and that three of these imps are like mouses, and
     the fourth like a sparrow, which she called Sparrow.'[852]

In 1646 the Huntingdonshire witches were tried. Elizabeth Weed of Great
Catworth confessed that--

     'about one and twenty yeares since she being saying her Prayers in the
     evening about bedtime, there did appeare unto her three Spirits, one
     in the likeness of a young man or boy, and the other two of two
     Puppies, the one white and the other black. Being demanded the name of
     the lesser Spirits, shee saith the name of the white one was Lilly,
     and the blacke one Priscill; and that the office of Lilly was to hurt
     man, woman, or childe; and the office of Priscill was to hurt Cattell
     when she desired.--Francis Moore saith, that about eight yeares since
     she received a little blacke puppy from one Margaret Simson of great
     Catworth, which dog the said Margaret had in her bed with her, and
     took it thence when she gave it to the Examinate: The Examinate
     further saith, that the said Margaret told her, that she must keep
     that dogge all her life time; and if she cursed any Cattell, and set
     the same dog upon them, they should presently dye, and the said
     Margaret told her that she had named it already, his name was Pretty.
     And the said Examinate further saith, that about the same time one
     goodwife Weed gave her a white Cat, telling her, that if she would
     deny God, and affirme the same by her bloud, then whomsoever she
     cursed and sent that Cat unto, they should dye shortly after.
     Whereupon the said Examinate saith that shee did deny God, and in
     affirmation thereof shee pricked her finger with a thorne, whence
     issued bloud, which the Cat presently licked, and the said gooodwife
     (_sic_) Weed named the Cat _Tissy_. And she further saith, that she
     killed the said Dog and Cat about a yeare since.--Joan Wallis of
     Keiston said [that the Devil came to her] and shee asked what his name
     was, and he said his name was Blackeman, and asked her if she were
     poore, and she said I; then he told her he would send one Grissell and
     Greedigut to her, that shall do any thing for her. And after Blackman
     was departed from her, within three or four dayes, Grissell and
     Greedigut came to her, in the shapes of dogges with great brisles of
     hogges haire upon their backs.' The accounts given by John Winnick,
     Ellen Shepheard, and Anne Desborough suggest that they are confused
     amplifications of the ritual to be observed in taking a familiar, the
     ritual being clearly given in the confession of Francis Moore when she
     was presented with the cat Tissy. John Winnick said, 'On a Friday
     being in the barne [where he lost his purse] there appeared unto him a
     Spirit, blacke and shaggy, and having pawes like a Beare, but in bulk
     not fully so big as a Coney. The Spirit asked him what he ailed to be
     so sorrowfull, this Examinate answered that he had lost a purse and
     money, and knew not how to come by it againe. The Spirit replied, if
     you will forsake God and Christ, and fall down and worship me for your
     God, I will help you to your purse and mony againe: This Examinate
     said he would, and thereupon fell down upon his knees and held up his
     hands. Then the Spirit said, tomorrow about this time of the day, you
     shall find your purse. Whereupon at the time prefixed, this Examinate
     went unto the place, and found his purse upon the floore and tooke it
     up, and looking afterwards into it, he found there all the money that
     was formerly lost: but before he had looked into it, the same Spirit
     appears unto him, and said, there is your purse and your money in it:
     and then this Examinate fell downe upon his knees and said, my Lord
     and God I thanke you. The said Spirit at that time brought with him
     two other Spirits, for shape, bignesse, and colour, the one like a
     white Cat, the other like a grey Coney: and while this Examinate was
     upon his knees, the Beare Spirit spake to him, saying, you must
     worship these two Spirits as you worship me, and take them for your
     Gods also: then this Examinate directed his bodie towards them, and
     call'd them his Lords and Gods. Then the Beare Spirit told him that
     when he dyed he must have his soule, whereunto this Examinate yielded.
     Hee told him then also that they must suck of his body, to which this
     Examinate also yielded.--Ellen Shepheard saith that about five years
     since, when she was in her homsted at Molesworth, there appeared unto
     her a Spirit, somewhat like a Rat, but not fully so big, of an
     iron-grey colour, and said you must goe with me, and she said, I will
     not, avoid Satan, and thereupon he went away. Shee saith, that within
     a short time after, going into the field, cursing, and fretting, and
     blaspheming, there appeared three Spirits more with the former in the
     fashion of Rats, of an iron-grey, and said, you must forsake God and
     Christ, and goe with me, and take those Spirits for your Gods, and you
     shall have all happinesse, whereunto she consented: And moreover they
     said unto her, that when she dyed, they must have her body and soule,
     and said they must have blood from her, which she granted, and
     thereupon they sucked her upon and about her hippes.--Anne Desborough
     confesseth, that about thirty yeares since, the first weeke of Cleane
     Lent, there appeared unto her a thing some-what bigger than a Mouse,
     of a brown colour, and of the likenesse of a mouse. This was while
     shee lived at Tichmarsh in the County of Northampton: she being there
     in bed, and in a dreame, the said likenesse then gave her a nip, and
     thereby awakened her out of her dreame, and then told her (when she
     was awakened) that it must have part of her soule; whereupon she was
     in a great feare, and gave him no answer, but prayed to God, and
     thereupon it vanished away from her. About five dayes after, the same
     Mouse appeared to her againe, bringing with it another Mouse, about
     the bignesse of an ordinary Mouse, or very little bigger, browne like
     the former, save only that the latter had some white about the belly,
     whereas the former was all browne. Then the Mouse that first appeared,
     said, we must sucke of your body. She yielded to them, and said, they
     should; upon her yielding, they went to her and sucked of her bodie,
     where the markes are found. The bigger mouse she called Tib, and the
     lesser Jone. Tib told her that she must forsake God and Christ, and
     take them for her Gods, telling her that when she dyed, they must have
     her soule, to all which she yielded.'[853]

In Cambridgeshire in 1647 Dorothy Ellis 'saith that about thirtie yeares
since shee being much troubled in her minde there appeared unto hir the
Devell in the liknes of a great catt and speak unto this ex^t and demanded
of hir hir blood w^ch she gave hime after which the spirit in the liknes of
a catt suck upon the body of this ex^t and the first thing this ex^t
commanded her spirit to doe was to goe and be witch four of the cattell of
Tho. Hitch all which cattell presently died '.[854] John Palmer of St.
Albans in 1649, 'upon his compact with the Divel, received a flesh brand,
or mark, upon his side, which gave suck to two familiars, the one in the
form of a dog, which he called George, and the other in the likeness of a
woman, called Jezebell.'[855] Of the Somerset witches in 1664, Alice Duke
'confesseth that her Familiar doth commonly suck her right Breast about
seven at night, in the shape of a little Cat of a dunnish colour, which is
as smooth as a Want, and when she is suckt, she is in a kind of a
Trance.--Christian Green saith, The Devil doth usually suck her left Brest
about five of the Clock in the Morning in the likeness of an Hedghog,
bending, and did so on Wednesday Morning last. She saith that it is painful
to her, and that she is usually in a trance when she is suckt.'[856] In
1665 Abre Grinset of Dunwich in Suffolk 'did confess that the Devil did
appear in the form of a Pretty handsom Young Man first; and since Appeareth
to her in the form of a blackish Gray Cat or Kitling, that it sucketh of a
Tett and hath drawn blood.'[857]

The only published account of the animal familiar in France shows a
combination of the two classes, for the creature was a toad kept in the
house, fed in a particular way, and used for divination.

Silvain Nevillon and Gentien le Clerc were tried at Orleans in 1614.
Silvain confessed--

     'qu'il y a des Sorciers qui nourrissent des Marionettes, qui sont de
     petits Diableteaux en forme de Crapaux, & leur font manger de la
     bouillie composée de laict & de farine, & leur donnent le premier
     mourceau, & n'oseroient s'absenter de leur maison sans leur demander
     congé, & luy faut dire combien de temps ils seront absens, comme trois
     ou quatre iours, & si elles disent que c'est trop, ceux qui les
     gardent, n'osent faire leur voyage ny outre-passer leur volonté. Et
     quand ils veulent aller en marchandise ou ioüer, & sçauoir s'il y fera
     bon, ils regardent si les-dites Marionettes sont ioyeuses, en ce cas
     ils vont en marchandise, ou ioüer: mais si elles sont maussades &
     tristes, ils ne bougent de la maison.--Gentil ou Genti[~e] le Clerc
     dit qu'il y auoit plus d'acquest en sa Marionette qu'en Dieu. Et auoit
     veu souuent la Marionette dudit Neuillon, qui est comme vn gros
     crapaut tout noir, comme d'vne fourrure noire, & estoit dans vne
     boëtte caché soubs vn carreau, qui sautoit & leuoit quand on vouloit
     donner à manger audit crapaut. Qu'il l'a veu encore puis six sepmaines
     en la ruelle du lict dudict Neuillon, & qu'il a veu qu'il l'apportoit
     vne autre fois dans son manteau, qu'il luy a dit vne douzaine de fois,
     que s'il vouloit il luy en feroit auoir vne. Qu'il y auoit plus profit
     en icelle qu'en Dieu, & qu'il gagneroit rien à regarder Dieu: mais que
     sa Marionette luy apportoit tousiours quelque chose.'[858] With this
     may be compared the account of a Lapp familiar in 1653: 'Dans chaque
     maison il y a un gros chat noir, duquel ils font grand estime, parlant
     à luy comme s'il avoit de la raison, ne font rien qu'il ne luy
     communique, croyans qu'il leur aide en leurs entreprises, ne manquans
     tous les soirs de sortir de leurs cabannes pour le consulter, & les
     suit par tout où ils vont, tant à la pesche qu'à la chasse. Quoy que
     cet animal ait la figure d'un chat par son regard, qui est
     épouvantable, j'ay creu & croy encore que c'est un Diable familier.'