 II

Late that night, when he was preparing for rest, the door of Fionn's
chamber opened gently and a young woman came into the room. The captain
stared at her, as he well might, for he had never seen or imagined to
see a woman so beautiful as this was. Indeed, she was not a woman, but
a young girl, and her bearing was so gently noble, her look so modestly
high, that the champion dared scarcely look at her, although he could
not by any means have looked away.

As she stood within the doorway, smiling, and shy as a flower,
beautifully timid as a fawn, the Chief communed with his heart.

"She is the Sky-woman of the Dawn," he said. "She is the light on the
foam. She is white and odorous as an apple-blossom. She smells of spice
and honey. She is my beloved beyond the women of the world. She shall
never be taken from me."

And that thought was delight and anguish to him: delight because of such
sweet prospect, anguish because it was not yet realised, and might not
be.

As the dogs had looked at him on the chase with a look that he did not
understand, so she looked at him, and in her regard there was a question
that baffled him and a statement which he could not follow.

He spoke to her then, mastering his heart to do it.

"I do not seem to know you," he said.

"You do not know me indeed," she replied.

"It is the more wonderful," he continued gently, "for I should know
every person that is here. What do you require from me?"

"I beg your protection, royal captain."

"I give that to all," he answered. "Against whom do you desire
protection?"

"I am in terror of the Fear Doirche."

"The Dark Man of the Shi?"

"He is my enemy," she said.

"He is mine now," said Fionn. "Tell me your story."

"My name is Saeve, and I am a woman of Faery," she commenced. "In the
Shi' many men gave me their love, but I gave my love to no man of my
country."

"That was not reasonable," the other chided with a blithe heart.

"I was contented," she replied, "and what we do not want we do not lack.
But if my love went anywhere it went to a mortal, a man of the men of
Ireland."

"By my hand," said Fionn in mortal distress, "I marvel who that man can
be!"

"He is known to you," she murmured. "I lived thus in the peace of Faery,
hearing often of my mortal champion, for the rumour of his great deeds
had gone through the Shi', until a day came when the Black Magician
of the Men of God put his eye on me, and, after that day, in whatever
direction I looked I saw his eye."

She stopped at that, and the terror that was in her heart was on her
face. "He is everywhere," she whispered. "He is in the bushes, and on
the hill. He looked up at me from the water, and he stared down on
me from the sky. His voice commands out of the spaces, and it demands
secretly in the heart. He is not here or there, he is in all places at
all times. I cannot escape from him," she said, "and I am afraid," and
at that she wept noiselessly and stared on Fionn.

"He is my enemy," Fionn growled. "I name him as my enemy."

"You will protect me," she implored.

"Where I am let him not come," said Fionn. "I also have knowledge. I am
Fionn, the son of Uail, the son of Baiscne, a man among men and a god
where the gods are."

"He asked me in marriage," she continued, "but my mind was full of my
own dear hero, and I refused the Dark Man."

"That was your right, and I swear by my hand that if the man you desire
is alive and unmarried he shall marry you or he will answer to me for
the refusal."

"He is not married," said Saeve, "and you have small control over him."
The Chief frowned thoughtfully. "Except the High King and the kings I
have authority in this land."

"What man has authority over himself?" said Saeve.

"Do you mean that I am the man you seek?" said Fionn.

"It is to yourself I gave my love," she replied. "This is good news,"
Fionn cried joyfully, "for the moment you came through the door I loved
and desired you, and the thought that you wished for another man went
into my heart like a sword." Indeed, Fionn loved Saeve as he had not
loved a woman before and would never love one again. He loved her as he
had never loved anything before. He could not bear to be away from her.
When he saw her he did not see the world, and when he saw the world
without her it was as though he saw nothing, or as if he looked on a
prospect that was bleak and depressing. The belling of a stag had been
music to Fionn, but when Saeve spoke that was sound enough for him. He
had loved to hear the cuckoo calling in the spring from the tree that
is highest in the hedge, or the blackbird's jolly whistle in an autumn
bush, or the thin, sweet enchantment that comes to the mind when a lark
thrills out of sight in the air and the hushed fields listen to the
song. But his wife's voice was sweeter to Fionn than the singing of a
lark. She filled him with wonder and surmise. There was magic in the
tips of her fingers. Her thin palm ravished him. Her slender foot set
his heart beating; and whatever way her head moved there came a new
shape of beauty to her face.

"She is always new," said Fionn. "She is always better than any other
woman; she is always better than herself."

He attended no more to the Fianna. He ceased to hunt. He did not listen
to the songs of poets or the curious sayings of magicians, for all of
these were in his wife, and something that was beyond these was in her
also.

"She is this world and the next one; she is completion," said Fionn.



