 I

There are more worlds than one, and in many ways they are unlike each
other. But joy and sorrow, or, in other words, good and evil, are not
absent in their degree from any of the worlds, for wherever there is
life there is action, and action is but the expression of one or other
of these qualities.

After this Earth there is the world of the Shi'. Beyond it again lies
the Many-Coloured Land. Next comes the Land of Wonder, and after that
the Land of Promise awaits us. You will cross clay to get into the Shi';
you will cross water to attain the Many-Coloured Land; fire must be
passed ere the Land of Wonder is attained, but we do not know what will
be crossed for the fourth world.

This adventure of Conn the Hundred Fighter and his son Art was by the
way of water, and therefore he was more advanced in magic than Fionn
was, all of whose adventures were by the path of clay and into Faery
only, but Conn was the High King and so the arch-magician of Ireland.

A council had been called in the Many-Coloured Land to discuss the case
of a lady named Becuma Cneisgel, that is, Becuma of the White Skin, the
daughter of Eogan Inver. She had run away from her husband Labraid and
had taken refuge with Gadiar, one of the sons of Mananna'n mac Lir, the
god of the sea, and the ruler, therefore, of that sphere.

It seems, then, that there is marriage in two other spheres. In the
Shi' matrimony is recorded as being parallel in every respect with
earth-marriage, and the desire which urges to it seems to be as violent
and inconstant as it is with us; but in the Many-Coloured Land marriage
is but a contemplation of beauty, a brooding and meditation wherein all
grosser desire is unknown and children are born to sinless parents.

In the Shi' the crime of Becuma would have been lightly considered, and
would have received none or but a nominal punishment, but in the second
world a horrid gravity attaches to such a lapse, and the retribution
meted is implacable and grim. It may be dissolution by fire, and that
can note a destruction too final for the mind to contemplate; or it may
be banishment from that sphere to a lower and worse one.

This was the fate of Becuma of the White Skin.

One may wonder how, having attained to that sphere, she could have
carried with her so strong a memory of the earth. It is certain that she
was not a fit person to exist in the Many-Coloured Land, and it is to be
feared that she was organised too grossly even for life in the Shi'.

She was an earth-woman, and she was banished to the earth.

Word was sent to the Shi's of Ireland that this lady should not be
permitted to enter any of them; from which it would seem that the
ordinances of the Shi come from the higher world, and, it might follow,
that the conduct of earth lies in the Shi'.

In that way, the gates of her own world and the innumerable doors of
Faery being closed against her, Becuma was forced to appear in the world
of men.

It is pleasant, however, notwithstanding her terrible crime and her
woeful punishment, to think how courageous she was. When she was told
her sentence, nay, her doom, she made no outcry, nor did she waste any
time in sorrow. She went home and put on her nicest clothes.

She wore a red satin smock, and, over this, a cloak of green silk out of
which long fringes of gold swung and sparkled, and she had light sandals
of white bronze on her thin, shapely feet. She had long soft hair that
was yellow as gold, and soft as the curling foam of the sea. Her eyes
were wide and clear as water and were grey as a dove's breast. Her teeth
were white as snow and of an evenness to marvel at. Her lips were thin
and beautifully curved: red lips in truth, red as winter berries and
tempting as the fruits of summer. The people who superintended her
departure said mournfully that when she was gone there would be no more
beauty left in their world.

She stepped into a coracle, it was pushed on the enchanted waters, and
it went forward, world within world, until land appeared, and her boat
swung in low tide against a rock at the foot of Ben Edair.

So far for her.



