 III

Being a king he had authority to ask questions. Conn asked her,
therefore, all the questions that he could think of, for it is not every
day that a lady drives from the sea, and she wearing a golden-fringed
cloak of green silk through which a red satin smock peeped at the
openings. She replied to his questions, but she did not tell him all the
truth; for, indeed, she could not afford to.

She knew who he was, for she retained some of the powers proper to the
worlds she had left, and as he looked on her soft yellow hair and on her
thin red lips, Conn recognised, as all men do, that one who is lovely
must also be good, and so he did not frame any inquiry on that count;
for everything is forgotten in the presence of a pretty woman, and a
magician can be bewitched also.

She told Conn that the fame of his son Art had reached even the
Many-Coloured Land, and that she had fallen in love with the boy. This
did not seem unreasonable to one who had himself ventured much in Faery,
and who had known so many of the people of that world leave their own
land for the love of a mortal.

"What is your name, my sweet lady?" said the king.

"I am called Delvcaem (Fair Shape) and I am the daughter of Morgan," she
replied.

"I have heard much of Morgan," said the king. "He is a very great
magician."

During this conversation Conn had been regarding her with the minute
freedom which is right only in a king. At what precise instant he forgot
his dead consort we do not know, but it is certain that at this moment
his mind was no longer burdened with that dear and lovely memory. His
voice was melancholy when he spoke again.

"You love my son!"

"Who could avoid loving him?" she murmured.

"When a woman speaks to a man about the love she feels for another man
she is not liked. And," he continued, "when she speaks to a man who has
no wife of his own about her love for another man then she is disliked."

"I would not be disliked by you," Becuma murmured.

"Nevertheless," said he regally, "I will not come between a woman and
her choice."

"I did not know you lacked a wife," said Becuma, but indeed she did.

"You know it now," the king replied sternly.

"What shall I do?" she inquired, "am I to wed you or your son?"

"You must choose," Conn answered.

"If you allow me to choose it means that you do not want me very badly,"
said she with a smile.

"Then I will not allow you to choose," cried the king, "and it is with
myself you shall marry."

He took her hand in his and kissed it.

"Lovely is this pale thin hand. Lovely is the slender foot that I see in
a small bronze shoe," said the king.

After a suitable time she continued:

"I should not like your son to be at Tara when I am there, or for a year
afterwards, for I do not wish to meet him until I have forgotten him and
have come to know you well."

"I do not wish to banish my son," the king protested.

"It would not really be a banishment," she said. "A prince's duty could
be set him, and in such an absence he would improve his knowledge both
of Ireland and of men. Further," she continued with downcast eyes,
"when you remember the reason that brought me here you will see that his
presence would be an embarrassment to us both, and my presence would be
unpleasant to him if he remembers his mother."

"Nevertheless," said Conn stubbornly, "I do not wish to banish my son;
it is awkward and unnecessary."

"For a year only," she pleaded.

"It is yet," he continued thoughtfully, "a reasonable reason that you
give and I will do what you ask, but by my hand and word I don't like
doing it."

They set out then briskly and joyfully on the homeward journey, and in
due time they reached Tara of the Kings.



