 V

The High King did not know where exactly he should look for such a
saviour, but he was well educated and knew how to look for whatever was
lacking. This knowledge will be useful to those upon whom a similar duty
should ever devolve.

He went to Ben Edair. He stepped into a coracle and pushed out to the
deep, and he permitted the coracle to go as the winds and the waves
directed it.

In such a way he voyaged among the small islands of the sea until he
lost all knowledge of his course and was adrift far out in ocean. He was
under the guidance of the stars and the great luminaries.

He saw black seals that stared and barked and dived dancingly, with the
round turn of a bow and the forward onset of an arrow. Great whales came
heaving from the green-hued void, blowing a wave of the sea high
into the air from their noses and smacking their wide flat tails
thunder-ously on the water. Porpoises went snorting past in bands and
clans. Small fish came sliding and flickering, and all the outlandish
creatures of the deep rose by his bobbing craft and swirled and sped
away.

Wild storms howled by him so that the boat climbed painfully to the sky
on a mile-high wave, balanced for a tense moment on its level top, and
sped down the glassy side as a stone goes furiously from a sling.

Or, again, caught in the chop of a broken sea, it stayed shuddering and
backing, while above his head there was only a low sad sky, and around
him the lap and wash of grey waves that were never the same and were
never different.

After long staring on the hungry nothingness of air and water he would
stare on the skin-stretched fabric of his boat as on a strangeness, or
he would examine his hands and the texture of his skin and the stiff
black hairs that grew behind his knuckles and sprouted around his ring,
and he found in these things newness and wonder.

Then, when days of storm had passed, the low grey clouds shivered and
cracked in a thousand places, each grim islet went scudding to the
horizon as though terrified by some great breadth, and when they had
passed he stared into vast after vast of blue infinity, in the depths
of which his eyes stayed and could not pierce, and wherefrom they could
scarcely be withdrawn. A sun beamed thence that filled the air with
sparkle and the sea with a thousand lights, and looking on these he was
reminded of his home at Tara: of the columns of white and yellow bronze
that blazed out sunnily on the sun, and the red and white and yellow
painted roofs that beamed at and astonished the eye.

Sailing thus, lost in a succession of days and nights, of winds and
calms, he came at last to an island.

His back was turned to it, and long before he saw it he smelled it and
wondered; for he had been sitting as in a daze, musing on a change that
had seemed to come in his changeless world; and for a long time he could
not tell what that was which made a difference on the salt-whipped wind
or why he should be excited. For suddenly he had become excited and his
heart leaped in violent expectation.

"It is an October smell," he said.

"It is apples that I smell."

He turned then and saw the island, fragrant with apple trees, sweet with
wells of wine; and, hearkening towards the shore, his ears, dulled yet
with the unending rhythms of the sea, distinguished and were filled
with song; for the isle was, as it were, a nest of birds, and they sang
joyously, sweetly, triumphantly.

He landed on that lovely island, and went forward under the darting
birds, under the apple boughs, skirting fragrant lakes about which were
woods of the sacred hazel and into which the nuts of knowledge fell and
swam; and he blessed the gods of his people because of the ground that
did not shiver and because of the deeply rooted trees that could not gad
or budge.



