 V

Within the cave there was silence except for the voices of the hags and
the scarcely audible moaning of the Fianna-Finn, but without there was
a dreadful uproar, for as each man returned from the chase his dogs came
with him, and although the men went into the cave the dogs did not.

They were too wise.

They stood outside, filled with savagery and terror, for they could
scent their masters and their masters' danger, and perhaps they could
get from the cave smells till then unknown and full of alarm.

From the troop of dogs there arose a baying and barking, a snarling and
howling and growling, a yelping and squealing and bawling for which no
words can be found. Now and again a dog nosed among a thousand smells
and scented his master; the ruff of his neck stood up like a hog's
bristles and a netty ridge prickled along his spine. Then with red eyes,
with bared fangs, with a hoarse, deep snort and growl he rushed at the
cave, and then he halted and sneaked back again with all his ruffles
smoothed, his tail between his legs, his eyes screwed sideways in
miserable apology and alarm, and a long thin whine of woe dribbling out
of his nose.

The three sisters took their wide-channelled, hard-tempered swords in
their hands, and prepared to slay the Fianna, but before doing so they
gave one more look from the door of the cave to see if there might be a
straggler of the Fianna who was escaping death by straggling, and they
saw one coming towards them with Bran and Sceo'lan leaping beside him,
while all the other dogs began to burst their throats with barks and
split their noses with snorts and wag their tails off at sight of the
tall, valiant, white-toothed champion, Goll mor mac Morna. "We will kill
that one first," said Caevo'g.

"There is only one of him," said Cuillen.

"And each of us three is the match for an hundred," said Iaran.

The uncanny, misbehaved, and outrageous harridans advanced then to meet
the son of Morna, and when he saw these three Goll whipped the sword
from his thigh, swung his buckler round, and got to them in ten great
leaps.

Silence fell on the world during that conflict. The wind went down; the
clouds stood still; the old hill itself held its breath; the warriors
within ceased to be men and became each an ear; and the dogs sat in
a vast circle round the combatants, with their heads all to one side,
their noses poked forward, their mouths half open, and their tails
forgotten. Now and again a dog whined in a whisper and snapped a
little snap on the air, but except for that there was neither sound nor
movement.

It was a long fight. It was a hard and a tricky fight, and Goll won it
by bravery and strategy and great good luck; for with one shrewd slice
of his blade he carved two of these mighty termagants into equal halves,
so that there were noses and whiskers to his right hand and knees and
toes to his left: and that stroke was known afterwards as one of the
three great sword-strokes of Ireland. The third hag, however, had
managed to get behind Goll, and she leaped on to his back with the bound
of a panther, and hung here with the skilful, many-legged, tight-twisted
clutching of a spider. But the great champion gave a twist of his hips
and a swing of his shoulders that whirled her around him like a sack.
He got her on the ground and tied her hands with the straps of a shield,
and he was going to give her the last blow when she appealed to his
honour and bravery.

"I put my life under your protection," said she. "And if you let me go
free I will lift the enchantment from the Fianna-Finn and will give them
all back to you again."

"I agree to that," said Goll, and he untied her straps. The harridan did
as she had promised, and in a short time Fionn and Oisi'n and Oscar and
Cona'n were released, and after that all the Fianna were released.



