 VI

Having gone some distance by these pleasant ways he saw a shapely house
dozing in the sunlight.

It was thatched with the wings of birds, blue wings and yellow and white
wings, and in the centre of the house there was a door of crystal set in
posts of bronze.

The queen of this island lived there, Rigru (Large-eyed), the daughter
of Lodan, and wife of Daire Degamra. She was seated on a crystal
throne with her son Segda by her side, and they welcomed the High King
courteously.

There were no servants in this palace; nor was there need for them. The
High King found that his hands had washed themselves, and when later on
he noticed that food had been placed before him he noticed also that
it had come without the assistance of servile hands. A cloak was laid
gently about his shoulders, and he was glad of it, for his own was
soiled by exposure to sun and wind and water, and was not worthy of a
lady's eye.

Then he was invited to eat.

He noticed, however, that food had been set for no one but himself, and
this did not please him, for to eat alone was contrary to the hospitable
usage of a king, and was contrary also to his contract with the gods.

"Good, my hosts," he remonstrated, "it is geasa (taboo) for me to eat
alone."

"But we never eat together," the queen replied.

"I cannot violate my geasa," said the High King.

"I will eat with you," said Segda (Sweet Speech), "and thus, while you
are our guest you will not do violence to your vows."

"Indeed," said Conn, "that will be a great satisfaction, for I have
already all the trouble that I can cope with and have no wish to add to
it by offending the gods."

"What is your trouble?" the gentle queen asked. "During a year," Conn
replied, "there has been neither corn nor milk in Ireland. The land is
parched, the trees are withered, the birds do not sing in Ireland, and
the bees do not make honey."

"You are certainly in trouble," the queen assented.

"But," she continued, "for what purpose have you come to our island?"

"I have come to ask for the loan of your son."

"A loan of my son!"

"I have been informed," Conn explained, "that if the son of a sinless
couple is brought to Tara and is bathed in the waters of Ireland the
land will be delivered from those ills."

The king of this island, Daire, had not hitherto spoken, but he now did
so with astonishment and emphasis.

"We would not lend our son to any one, not even to gain the kingship of
the world," said he.

But Segda, observing that the guest's countenance was discomposed, broke
in:

"It is not kind to refuse a thing that the Ard-Ri' of Ireland asks for,
and I will go with him."

"Do not go, my pulse," his father advised.

"Do not go, my one treasure," his mother pleaded.

"I must go indeed," the boy replied, "for it is to do good I am
required, and no person may shirk such a requirement."

"Go then," said his father, "but I will place you under the protection
of the High King and of the Four Provincial Kings of Ireland, and under
the protection of Art, the son of Conn, and of Fionn, the son of Uail,
and under the protection of the magicians and poets and the men of art
in Ireland." And he thereupon bound these protections and safeguards on
the Ard-Ri' with an oath.

"I will answer for these protections," said Conn.

He departed then from the island with Segda and in three days they
reached Ireland, and in due time they arrived at Tara.



