 V

In the morning as they sat at breakfast four clerics were announced, and
when they entered the king looked on them with stern disapproval.

"What is the meaning of this journey on Sunday?" he demanded.

A lank-jawed, thin-browed brother, with uneasy, intertwining fingers,
and a deep-set, venomous eye, was the spokesman of those four.

"Indeed," he said, and the fingers of his right hand strangled and did
to death the fingers of his left hand, "indeed, we have transgressed by
order."

"Explain that."

"We have been sent to you hurriedly by our master, Molasius of
Devenish."

"A pious, a saintly man," the king interrupted, "and one who does not
countenance transgressions of the Sunday."

"We were ordered to tell you as follows," said the grim cleric, and he
buried the fingers of his right hand in his left fist, so that one could
not hope to see them resurrected again. "It was the duty of one of
the Brothers of Devenish," he continued, "to turn out the cattle this
morning before the dawn of day, and that Brother, while in his duty, saw
eight comely young men who fought together."

"On the morning of Sunday," Dermod exploded.

The cleric nodded with savage emphasis.

"On the morning of this self-same and instant sacred day."

"Tell on," said the king wrathfully.

But terror gripped with sudden fingers at Becfola's heart.

"Do not tell horrid stories on the Sunday," she pleaded. "No good can
come to any one from such a tale."

"Nay, this must be told, sweet lady," said the king. But the cleric
stared at her glumly, forbiddingly, and resumed his story at a gesture.

"Of these eight men, seven were killed."

"They are in hell," the king said gloomily.

"In hell they are," the cleric replied with enthusiasm.

"And the one that was not killed?"

"He is alive," that cleric responded.

"He would be," the monarch assented. "Tell your tale."

"Molasius had those seven miscreants buried, and he took from their
unhallowed necks and from their lewd arms and from their unblessed
weapons the load of two men in gold and silver treasure."

"Two men's load!" said Dermod thoughtfully.

"That much," said the lean cleric. "No more, no less. And he has sent us
to find out what part of that hellish treasure belongs to the Brothers
of Devenish and how much is the property of the king."

Becfola again broke in, speaking graciously, regally, hastily: "Let
those Brothers have the entire of the treasure, for it is Sunday
treasure, and as such it will bring no luck to any one."

The cleric again looked at her coldly, with a harsh-lidded, small-set,
grey-eyed glare, and waited for the king's reply.

Dermod pondered, shaking his head as to an argument on his left side,
and then nodding it again as to an argument on his right.

"It shall be done as this sweet queen advises. Let a reliquary be formed
with cunning workmanship of that gold and silver, dated with my date and
signed with my name, to be in memory of my grandmother who gave birth to
a lamb, to a salmon, and then to my father, the Ard-Ri'. And, as to the
treasure that remains over, a pastoral staff may be beaten from it in
honour of Molasius, the pious man."

"The story is not ended," said that glum, spike-chinned cleric.

The king moved with jovial impatience.

"If you continue it," he said, "it will surely come to an end some time.
A stone on a stone makes a house, dear heart, and a word on a word tells
a tale."

The cleric wrapped himself into himself, and became lean and menacing.
He whispered: "Besides the young man, named Flann, who was not slain,
there was another person present at the scene and the combat and the
transgression of Sunday."

"Who was that person?" said the alarmed monarch.

The cleric spiked forward his chin, and then butted forward his brow.

"It was the wife of the king," he shouted. "It was the woman called
Becfola. It was that woman," he roared, and he extended a lean,
inflexible, unending first finger at the queen.

"Dog!" the king stammered, starting up.

"If that be in truth a woman," the cleric screamed.

"What do you mean?" the king demanded in wrath and terror.

"Either she is a woman of this world to be punished, or she is a woman
of the Shi' to be banished, but this holy morning she was in the Shi',
and her arms were about the neck of Flann."

The king sank back in his chair stupefied, gazing from one to the other,
and then turned an unseeing, fear-dimmed eye towards Becfola.

"Is this true, my pulse?" he murmured.

"It is true," Becfola replied, and she became suddenly to the king's eye
a whiteness and a stare. He pointed to the door.

"Go to your engagement," he stammered. "Go to that Flann."

"He is waiting for me," said Becfola with proud shame, "and the thought
that he should wait wrings my heart."

She went out from the palace then. She went away from Tara: and in all
Ireland and in the world of living men she was not seen again, and she
was never heard of again.




THE LITTLE BRAWL AT ALLEN



