 XIV

He listened to the retreating footsteps until they could be heard no
more, and the one sound that came to his tense ears was the beating of
his own heart.

Even the wind had ceased, and there seemed to be nothing in the world
but the darkness and himself. In that gigantic blackness, in that unseen
quietude and vacancy, the mind could cease to be personal to itself. It
could be overwhelmed and merged in space, so that consciousness would
be transferred or dissipated, and one might sleep standing; for the mind
fears loneliness more than all else, and will escape to the moon rather
than be driven inwards on its own being.

But Fionn was not lonely, and he was not afraid when the son of Midna
came.

A long stretch of the silent night had gone by, minute following minute
in a slow sequence, wherein as there was no change there was no time;
wherein there was no past and no future, but a stupefying, endless
present which is almost the annihilation of consciousness. A change
came then, for the clouds had also been moving and the moon at last was
sensed behind them--not as a radiance, but as a percolation of light,
a gleam that was strained through matter after matter and was less than
the very wraith or remembrance of itself; a thing seen so narrowly,
so sparsely, that the eye could doubt if it was or was not seeing, and
might conceive that its own memory was re-creating that which was still
absent.

But Fionn's eye was the eye of a wild creature that spies on darkness
and moves there wittingly. He saw, then, not a thing but a movement;
something that was darker than the darkness it loomed on; not a being
but a presence, and, as it were, impending pressure. And in a little he
heard the deliberate pace of that great being.

Fionn bent to his spear and unloosed its coverings.

Then from the darkness there came another sound; a low, sweet sound;
thrillingly joyous, thrillingly low; so low the ear could scarcely note
it, so sweet the ear wished to catch nothing else and would strive to
hear it rather than all sounds that may be heard by man: the music of
another world! the unearthly, dear melody of the Shi'! So sweet it was
that the sense strained to it, and having reached must follow drowsily
in its wake, and would merge in it, and could not return again to its
own place until that strange harmony was finished and the ear restored
to freedom.

But Fionn had taken the covering from his spear, and with his brow
pressed close to it he kept his mind and all his senses engaged on that
sizzling, murderous point.

The music ceased and Aillen hissed a fierce blue flame from his mouth,
and it was as though he hissed lightning.

Here it would seem that Fionn used magic, for spreading out his fringed
mantle he caught the flame. Rather he stopped it, for it slid from the
mantle and sped down into the earth to the depth of twenty-six spans;
from which that slope is still called the Glen of the Mantle, and the
rise on which Aillen stood is known as the Ard of Fire.

One can imagine the surprise of Aillen mac Midna, seeing his fire caught
and quenched by an invisible hand. And one can imagine that at this
check he might be frightened, for who would be more terrified than a
magician who sees his magic fail, and who, knowing of power, will guess
at powers of which he has no conception and may well dread.

Everything had been done by him as it should be done. His pipe had been
played and his timpan, all who heard that music should be asleep, and
yet his fire was caught in full course and was quenched.

Aillen, with all the terrific strength of which he was master, blew
again, and the great jet of blue flame came roaring and whistling from
him and was caught and disappeared.

Panic swirled into the man from Faery; he turned from that terrible spot
and fled, not knowing what might be behind, but dreading it as he
had never before dreaded anything, and the unknown pursued him; that
terrible defence became offence and hung to his heel as a wolf pads by
the flank of a bull.

And Aillen was not in his own world! He was in the world of men, where
movement is not easy and the very air a burden. In his own sphere, in
his own element, he might have outrun Fionn, but this was Fionn's world,
Fionn's element, and the flying god was not gross enough to outstrip
him. Yet what a race he gave, for it was but at the entrance to his
own Shi' that the pursuer got close enough. Fionn put a finger into
the thong of the great spear, and at that cast night fell on Aillen
mac Midna. His eyes went black, his mind whirled and ceased, there
came nothingness where he had been, and as the Birgha whistled into his
shoulder-blades he withered away, he tumbled emptily and was dead. Fionn
took his lovely head from its shoulders and went back through the night
to Tara.

Triumphant Fionn, who had dealt death to a god, and to whom death would
be dealt, and who is now dead!

He reached the palace at sunrise.

On that morning all were astir early. They wished to see what
destruction had been wrought by the great being, but it was young Fionn
they saw and that redoubtable head swinging by its hair. "What is your
demand?" said the Ard-Ri'. "The thing that it is right I should ask,"
said Fionn: "the command of the Fianna of Ireland."

"Make your choice," said Conn to Goll Mor; "you will leave Ireland, or
you will place your hand in the hand of this champion and be his man."

Goll could do a thing that would be hard for another person, and he
could do it so beautifully that he was not diminished by any action.

"Here is my hand," said Goll.

And he twinkled at the stern, young eyes that gazed on him as he made
his submission.




THE BIRTH OF BRAN



