 I

Fionn mac Uail was the most prudent chief of an army in the world, but
he was not always prudent on his own account. Discipline sometimes
irked him, and he would then take any opportunity that presented for an
adventure; for he was not only a soldier, he was a poet also, that is, a
man of science, and whatever was strange or unusual had an irresistible
at-traction for him. Such a soldier was he that, single-handed, he could
take the Fianna out of any hole they got into, but such an inveterate
poet was he that all the Fianna together could scarcely retrieve him
from the abysses into which he tumbled. It took him to keep the Fianna
safe, but it took all the Fianna to keep their captain out of danger.
They did not complain of this, for they loved every hair of Fionn's head
more than they loved their wives and children, and that was reasonable
for there was never in the world a person more worthy of love than Fionn
was.

Goll mac Morna did not admit so much in words, but he admitted it in
all his actions, for although he never lost an opportunity of killing
a member of Fionn's family (there was deadly feud between clann-Baiscne
and clann-Morna), yet a call from Fionn brought Goll raging to his
assistance like a lion that rages tenderly by his mate. Not even a call
was necessary, for Goll felt in his heart when Fionn was threatened, and
he would leave Fionn's own brother only half-killed to fly where his arm
was wanted. He was never thanked, of course, for although Fionn loved
Goll he did not like him, and that was how Goll felt towards Fionn.

Fionn, with Cona'n the Swearer and the dogs Bran and Sceo'lan, was
sitting on the hunting-mound at the top of Cesh Corran. Below and around
on every side the Fianna were beating the coverts in Legney and Brefny,
ranging the fastnesses of Glen Dallan, creeping in the nut and beech
forests of Carbury, spying among the woods of Kyle Conor, and ranging
the wide plain of Moy Conal.

The great captain was happy: his eyes were resting on the sights he
liked best--the sunlight of a clear day, the waving trees, the pure
sky, and the lovely movement of the earth; and his ears were filled with
delectable sounds--the baying of eager dogs, the clear calling of young
men, the shrill whistling that came from every side, and each sound of
which told a definite thing about the hunt. There was also the plunge
and scurry of the deer, the yapping of badgers, and the whirr of birds
driven into reluctant flight.



