 X

He went forward in his light bark, and at some moment found that he
had parted from those seas and was adrift on vaster and more turbulent
billows. From those dark-green surges there gaped at him monstrous
and cavernous jaws; and round, wicked, red-rimmed, bulging eyes stared
fixedly at the boat. A ridge of inky water rushed foaming mountainously
on his board, and behind that ridge came a vast warty head that gurgled
and groaned. But at these vile creatures he thrust with his lengthy
spear or stabbed at closer reach with a dagger.

He was not spared one of the terrors which had been foretold. Thus, in
the dark thick oak forest he slew the seven hags and buried them in the
molten lead which they had heated for him. He climbed an icy mountain,
the cold breath of which seemed to slip into his body and chip off
inside of his bones, and there, until he mastered the sort of climbing
on ice, for each step that he took upwards he slipped back ten steps.
Almost his heart gave way before he learned to climb that venomous hill.
In a forked glen into which he slipped at night-fall he was surrounded
by giant toads, who spat poison, and were icy as the land they lived
in, and were cold and foul and savage. At Sliav Saev he encountered the
long-maned lions who lie in wait for the beasts of the world, growling
woefully as they squat above their prey and crunch those terrified
bones. He came on Ailill of the Black Teeth sitting on the bridge that
spanned a torrent, and the grim giant was grinding his teeth on a pillar
stone. Art drew nigh unobserved and brought him low.

It was not for nothing that these difficulties and dangers were in his
path. These things and creatures were the invention of Dog Head, the
wife of Morgan, for it had become known to her that she would die on the
day her daughter was wooed. Therefore none of the dangers encountered
by Art were real, but were magical chimeras conjured against him by the
great witch.

Affronting all, conquering all, he came in time to Morgan's dun, a place
so lovely that after the miseries through which he had struggled he
almost wept to see beauty again.

Delvcaem knew that he was coming. She was waiting for him, yearning for
him. To her mind Art was not only love, he was freedom, for the poor
girl was a captive in her father's home. A great pillar an hundred feet
high had been built on the roof of Morgan's palace, and on the top of
this pillar a tiny room had been constructed, and in this room Delvcaem
was a prisoner.

She was lovelier in shape than any other princess of the Many-Coloured
Land. She was wiser than all the other women of that land, and she
was skilful in music, embroidery, and chastity, and in all else that
pertained to the knowledge of a queen.

Although Delvcaem's mother wished nothing but ill to Art, she yet
treated him with the courtesy proper in a queen on the one hand and
fitting towards the son of the King of Ireland on the other. Therefore,
when Art entered the palace he was met and kissed, and he was bathed and
clothed and fed. Two young girls came to him then, having a cup in
each of their hands, and presented him with the kingly drink, but,
remembering the warning which Credl had given him, he drank only from
the right-hand cup and escaped the poison. Next he was visited by
Delvcaem's mother, Dog Head, daughter of the King of the Dog Heads, and
Morgan's queen. She was dressed in full armour, and she challenged Art
to fight with her.

It was a woeful combat, for there was no craft or sagacity unknown to
her, and Art would infallibly have perished by her hand but that her
days were numbered, her star was out, and her time had come. It was her
head that rolled on the ground when the combat was over, and it was
her head that grinned and shrivelled on the vacant spike which she had
reserved for Art's.

Then Art liberated Delvcaem from her prison at the top of the pillar
and they were affianced together. But the ceremony had scarcely been
completed when the tread of a single man caused the palace to quake and
seemed to jar the world.

It was Morgan returning to the palace.

The gloomy king challenged him to combat also, and in his honour Art
put on the battle harness which he had brought from Ireland. He wore a
breastplate and helmet of gold, a mantle of blue satin swung from his
shoulders, his left hand was thrust into the grips of a purple
shield, deeply bossed with silver, and in the other hand he held the
wide-grooved, blue hilted sword which had rung so often into fights and
combats, and joyous feats and exercises.

Up to this time the trials through which he had passed had seemed so
great that they could not easily be added to. But if all those trials
had been gathered into one vast calamity they would not equal one half
of the rage and catastrophe of his war with Morgan.

For what he could not effect by arms Morgan would endeavour by guile,
so that while Art drove at him or parried a crafty blow, the shape of
Morgan changed before his eyes, and the monstrous king was having at him
in another form, and from a new direction.

It was well for the son of the Ard-Ri' that he had been beloved by the
poets and magicians of his land, and that they had taught him all that
was known of shape-changing and words of power.

He had need of all these.

At times, for the weapon must change with the enemy, they fought with
their foreheads as two giant stags, and the crash of their monstrous
onslaught rolled and lingered on the air long after their skulls had
parted. Then as two lions, long-clawed, deep-mouthed, snarling, with
rigid mane, with red-eyed glare, with flashing, sharp-white fangs, they
prowled lithely about each other seeking for an opening. And then as two
green-ridged, white-topped, broad-swung, overwhelming, vehement billows
of the deep, they met and crashed and sunk into and rolled away from
each other; and the noise of these two waves was as the roar of all
ocean when the howl of the tempest is drowned in the league-long fury of
the surge.

But when the wife's time has come the husband is doomed. He is required
elsewhere by his beloved, and Morgan went to rejoin his queen in the
world that comes after the Many-Coloured Land, and his victor shore that
knowledgeable head away from its giant shoulders.

He did not tarry in the Many-Coloured Land, for he had nothing further
to seek there. He gathered the things which pleased him best from among
the treasures of its grisly king, and with Delvcaem by his side they
stepped into the coracle.

Then, setting their minds on Ireland, they went there as it were in a
flash.

The waves of all the world seemed to whirl past them in one huge, green
cataract. The sound of all these oceans boomed in their ears for one
eternal instant. Nothing was for that moment but a vast roar and pour
of waters. Thence they swung into a silence equally vast, and so sudden
that it was as thunderous in the comparison as was the elemental rage
they quitted. For a time they sat panting, staring at each other,
holding each other, lest not only their lives but their very souls
should be swirled away in the gusty passage of world within world; and
then, looking abroad, they saw the small bright waves creaming by the
rocks of Ben Edair, and they blessed the power that had guided and
protected them, and they blessed the comely land of Ir.

On reaching Tara, Delvcaem, who was more powerful in art and magic than
Becuma, ordered the latter to go away, and she did so.

She left the king's side. She came from the midst of the counsellors and
magicians. She did not bid farewell to any one. She did not say good-bye
to the king as she set out for Ben Edair.

Where she could go to no man knew, for she had been ban-ished from the
Many-Coloured Land and could not return there. She was forbidden entry
to the Shi' by Angus Og, and she could not remain in Ireland. She went
to Sasana and she became a queen in that country, and it was she who
fostered the rage against the Holy Land which has not ceased to this
day.




MONGAN'S FRENZY


