 II

They were married in a haste which equalled the king's desire; and as he
did not again ask her name, and as she did not volunteer to give it, and
as she brought no dowry to her husband and received none from him, she
was called Becfola, the Dowerless.

Time passed, and the king's happiness was as great as his expectation
of it had promised. But on the part of Becfola no similar tidings can be
given.

There are those whose happiness lies in ambition and station, and to
such a one the fact of being queen to the High King of Ireland is a
satisfaction at which desire is sated. But the mind of Becfola was not
of this temperate quality, and, lacking Crimthann, it seemed to her that
she possessed nothing.

For to her mind he was the sunlight in the sun, the brightness in the
moonbeam; he was the savour in fruit and the taste in honey; and when
she looked from Crimthann to the king she could not but consider that
the right man was in the wrong place. She thought that crowned only with
his curls Crlmthann mac Ae was more nobly diademed than are the masters
of the world, and she told him so.

His terror on hearing this unexpected news was so great that he
meditated immediate flight from Tara; but when a thing has been uttered
once it is easier said the second time and on the third repetition it is
patiently listened to.

After no great delay Crimthann mac Ae agreed and arranged that he and
Becfola should fly from Tara, and it was part of their understanding
that they should live happily ever after.

One morning, when not even a bird was astir, the king felt that his dear
companion was rising. He looked with one eye at the light that stole
greyly through the window, and recognised that it could not in justice
be called light.

"There is not even a bird up," he murmured.

And then to Becfola.

"What is the early rising for, dear heart?"

"An engagement I have," she replied.

"This is not a time for engagements," said the calm monarch.

"Let it be so," she replied, and she dressed rapidly.

"And what is the engagement?" he pursued.

"Raiment that I left at a certain place and must have. Eight silken
smocks embroidered with gold, eight precious brooches of beaten gold,
three diadems of pure gold."

"At this hour," said the patient king, "the bed is better than the
road."

"Let it be so," said she.

"And moreover," he continued, "a Sunday journey brings bad luck."

"Let the luck come that will come," she answered.

"To keep a cat from cream or a woman from her gear is not work for a
king," said the monarch severely.

The Ard-Ri' could look on all things with composure, and regard all
beings with a tranquil eye; but it should be known that there was one
deed entirely hateful to him, and he would punish its commission with
the very last rigour--this was, a transgression of the Sunday. During
six days of the week all that could happen might happen, so far as
Dermod was concerned, but on the seventh day nothing should happen at
all if the High King could restrain it. Had it been possible he would
have tethered the birds to their own green branches on that day, and
forbidden the clouds to pack the upper world with stir and colour. These
the king permitted, with a tight lip, perhaps, but all else that came
under his hand felt his control.

It was his custom when he arose on the morn of Sunday to climb to the
most elevated point of Tara, and gaze thence on every side, so that
he might see if any fairies or people of the Shi' were disporting
themselves in his lordship; for he absolutely prohibited the usage of
the earth to these beings on the Sunday, and woe's worth was it for the
sweet being he discovered breaking his law.

We do not know what ill he could do to the fairies, but during Dermod's
reign the world said its prayers on Sunday and the Shi' folk stayed in
their hills.

It may be imagined, therefore, with what wrath he saw his wife's
preparations for her journey, but, although a king can do everything,
what can a husband do...? He rearranged himself for slumber.

"I am no party to this untimely journey," he said angrily.

"Let it be so," said Becfola.

She left the palace with one maid, and as she crossed the doorway
something happened to her, but by what means it happened would be hard
to tell; for in the one pace she passed out of the palace and out of the
world, and the second step she trod was in Faery, but she did not know
this.

Her intention was to go to Cluain da chaillech to meet Crimthann, but
when she left the palace she did not remember Crimthann any more.

To her eye and to the eye of her maid the world was as it always had
been, and the landmarks they knew were about them. But the object for
which they were travelling was different, although unknown, and the
people they passed on the roads were unknown, and were yet people that
they knew.

They set out southwards from Tara into the Duffry of Leinster, and after
some time they came into wild country and went astray. At last Becfola
halted, saying:

"I do not know where we are."

The maid replied that she also did not know.

"Yet," said Becfola, "if we continue to walk straight on we shall arrive
somewhere."

They went on, and the maid watered the road with her tears.

Night drew on them; a grey chill, a grey silence, and they were
enveloped in that chill and silence; and they began to go in expectation
and terror, for they both knew and did not know that which they were
bound for.

As they toiled desolately up the rustling and whispering side of a
low hill the maid chanced to look back, and when she looked back she
screamed and pointed, and clung to Becfola's arm. Becfola followed the
pointing finger, and saw below a large black mass that moved jerkily
forward.

"Wolves!" cried the maid. "Run to the trees yonder," her mistress
ordered. "We will climb them and sit among the branches."

They ran then, the maid moaning and lamenting all the while.

"I cannot climb a tree," she sobbed, "I shall be eaten by the wolves."

And that was true.

But her mistress climbed a tree, and drew by a hand's breadth from the
rap and snap and slaver of those steel jaws. Then, sitting on a branch,
she looked with angry woe at the straining and snarling horde below,
seeing many a white fang in those grinning jowls, and the smouldering,
red blink of those leaping and prowling eyes.



