 VIII

"You have not told me one word about Duv Laca," said the Flame Lady
reproachfully.

"I am coming to that," replied Mongan.

He motioned towards one of the great vats, and wine was brought to him,
of which he drank so joyously and so deeply that all people wondered at
his thirst, his capacity, and his jovial spirits.

"Now, I will begin again."


Said Mongan: There was an attendant in Fiachna Finn's palace who was
called An Da'v, and the same night that Fiachna's wife bore a son, the
wife of An Da'v gave birth to a son also. This latter child was called
mac an Da'v, but the son of Fiachna's wife was named Mongan.

"Ah!" murmured the Flame Lady.

The queen was angry. She said it was unjust and presumptuous that the
servant should get a child at the same time that she got one herself,
but there was no help for it, because the child was there and could not
be obliterated.

Now this also must be told.

There was a neighbouring prince called Fiachna Duv, and he was the ruler
of the Dal Fiatach. For a long time he had been at enmity and spiteful
warfare with Fiachna Finn; and to this Fiachna Duv there was born in
the same night a daughter, and this girl was named Duv Laca of the White
Hand.

"Ah!" cried the Flame Lady.

"You see!" said Mongan, and he drank anew and joyously of the fairy
wine.

In order to end the trouble between Fiachna Finn and Fiachna Duv the
babies were affianced to each other in the cradle on the day after they
were born, and the men of Ireland rejoiced at that deed and at that
news. But soon there came dismay and sorrow in the land, for when the
little Mongan was three days old his real father, Mananna'n the son
of Lir, appeared in the middle of the palace. He wrapped Mongan in his
green cloak and took him away to rear and train in the Land of Promise,
which is beyond the sea that is at the other side of the grave.

When Fiachna Duv heard that Mongan, who was affianced to his daughter
Duv Laca, had disappeared, he considered that his compact of peace was
at an end, and one day he came by surprise and attacked the palace.
He killed Fiachna Finn in that battle, and be crowned himself King of
Ulster.

The men of Ulster disliked him, and they petitioned Mananna'n to bring
Mongan back, but Mananna'n would not do this until the boy was sixteen
years of age and well reared in the wisdom of the Land of Promise. Then
he did bring Mongan back, and by his means peace was made between Mongan
and Fiachna Duv, and Mongan was married to his cradle-bride, the young
Duv Laca.



