 II

When Iollan and Tuiren were married they went to Ulster, and they lived
together very happily. But the law of life is change; nothing
continues in the same way for any length of time; happiness must become
unhappiness, and will be succeeded again by the joy it had displaced.
The past also must be reckoned with; it is seldom as far behind us as we
could wish: it is more often in front, blocking the way, and the future
trips over it just when we think that the road is clear and joy our own.

Iollan had a past. He was not ashamed of it; he merely thought it
was finished, although in truth it was only beginning, for it is that
perpetual beginning of the past that we call the future.

Before he joined the Fianna he had been in love with a lady of the Shi',
named Uct Dealv (Fair Breast), and they had been sweethearts for years.
How often he had visited his sweetheart in Faery! With what eagerness
and anticipation he had gone there; the lover's whistle that he used to
give was known to every person in that Shi', and he had been discussed
by more than one of the delicate sweet ladies of Faery. "That is your
whistle, Fair Breast," her sister of the Shi' would say.

And Uct Dealv would reply: "Yes, that is my mortal, my lover, my pulse,
and my one treasure."

She laid her spinning aside, or her embroidery if she was at that, or if
she were baking a cake of fine wheaten bread mixed with honey she would
leave the cake to bake itself and fly to Iollan. Then they went hand in
hand in the country that smells of apple-blossom and honey, looking on
heavy-boughed trees and on dancing and beaming clouds. Or they stood
dreaming together, locked in a clasping of arms and eyes, gazing up
and down on each other, Iollan staring down into sweet grey wells that
peeped and flickered under thin brows, and Uct Dealv looking up into
great black ones that went dreamy and went hot in endless alternation.

Then Iollan would go back to the world of men, and Uct Dealv would
return to her occupations in the Land of the Ever Young.

"What did he say?" her sister of the Shi' would ask.

"He said I was the Berry of the Mountain, the Star of Knowledge, and the
Blossom of the Raspberry."

"They always say the same thing," her sister pouted.

"But they look other things," Uct Dealv insisted. "They feel other
things," she murmured; and an endless conversation recommenced.

Then for some time Iollan did not come to Faery, and Uct Dealv marvelled
at that, while her sister made an hundred surmises, each one worse than
the last.

"He is not dead or he would be here," she said. "He has forgotten you,
my darling."

News was brought to Tlr na n-Og of the marriage of Iollan and Tuiren,
and when Uct Dealv heard that news her heart ceased to beat for a
moment, and she closed her eyes.

"Now!" said her sister of the Shi'. "That is how long the love of a
mortal lasts," she added, in the voice of sad triumph which is proper to
sisters.

But on Uct Dealv there came a rage of jealousy and despair such as no
person in the Shi' had ever heard of, and from that moment she
became capable of every ill deed; for there are two things not easily
controlled, and they are hunger and jealousy. She determined that the
woman who had supplanted her in Iollan's affections should rue the day
she did it. She pondered and brooded revenge in her heart, sitting in
thoughtful solitude and bitter collectedness until at last she had a
plan.

She understood the arts of magic and shape-changing, so she changed
her shape into that of Fionn's female runner, the best-known woman in
Ireland; then she set out from Faery and appeared in the world. She
travelled in the direction of Iollan's stronghold.

Iollan knew the appearance of Fionn's messenger, but he was surprised to
see her.

She saluted him.

"Health and long life, my master.".

"Health and good days," he replied. "What brings you here, dear heart?"

"I come from Fionn."

"And your message?" said he.

"The royal captain intends to visit you."

"He will be welcome," said Iollan. "We shall give him an Ulster feast."

"The world knows what that is," said the messenger courteously. "And
now," she continued, "I have messages for your queen."

Tuiren then walked from the house with the messenger, but when they had
gone a short distance Uct Dealv drew a hazel rod from beneath her cloak
and struck it on the queen's shoulder, and on the instant Tuiren's
figure trembled and quivered, and it began to whirl inwards and
downwards, and she changed into the appearance of a hound.

It was sad to see the beautiful, slender dog standing shivering and
astonished, and sad to see the lovely eyes that looked out pitifully
in terror and amazement. But Uct Dealv did not feel sad. She clasped
a chain about the hound's neck, and they set off westward towards the
house of Fergus Fionnliath, who was reputed to be the unfriendliest man
in the world to a dog. It was because of his reputation that Uct Dealv
was bringing the hound to him. She did not want a good home for this
dog: she wanted the worst home that could be found in the world, and she
thought that Fergus would revenge for her the rage and jealousy which
she felt towards Tuiren.



