 I

One day something happened to Fionn, the son of Uail; that is, he
departed from the world of men, and was set wandering in great distress
of mind through Faery. He had days and nights there and adventures
there, and was able to bring back the memory of these.

That, by itself, is wonderful, for there are few people who remember
that they have been to Faery or aught of all that happened to them in
that state.

In truth we do not go to Faery, we become Faery, and in the beating of a
pulse we may live for a year or a thousand years. But when we return
the memory is quickly clouded, and we seem to have had a dream or seen a
vision, although we have verily been in Faery.

It was wonderful, then, that Fionn should have remembered all that
happened to him in that wide-spun moment, but in this tale there is yet
more to marvel at; for not only did Fionn go to Faery, but the great
army which he had marshalled to Ben Edair [The Hill of Howth] were
translated also, and neither he nor they were aware that they had
departed from the world until they came back to it.

Fourteen battles, seven of the reserve and seven of the regular Fianna,
had been taken by the Chief on a great march and manoeuvre. When they
reached Ben Edair it was decided to pitch camp so that the troops
might rest in view of the warlike plan which Fionn had imagined for the
morrow. The camp was chosen, and each squadron and company of the host
were lodged into an appropriate place, so there was no overcrowding and
no halt or interruption of the march; for where a company halted that
was its place of rest, and in that place it hindered no other company,
and was at its own ease.

When this was accomplished the leaders of battalions gathered on a
level, grassy plateau overlooking the sea, where a consultation began
as to the next day's manoeuvres, and during this discussion they looked
often on the wide water that lay wrinkling and twinkling below them.

A roomy ship under great press of sall was bearing on Ben Edair from the
east.

Now and again, in a lull of the discussion, a champion would look and
remark on the hurrying vessel; and it may have been during one of these
moments that the adventure happened to Fionn and the Fianna.

"I wonder where that ship comes from?" said Cona'n idly.

But no person could surmise anything about it beyond that it was a
vessel well equipped for war.

As the ship drew by the shore the watchers observed a tall man swing
from the side by means of his spear shafts, and in a little while this
gentleman was announced to Fionn, and was brought into his presence.

A sturdy, bellicose, forthright personage he was indeed. He was equipped
in a wonderful solidity of armour, with a hard, carven helmet on
his head, a splendid red-bossed shield swinging on his shoulder, a
wide-grooved, straight sword clashing along his thigh. On his shoulders
under the shield he carried a splendid scarlet mantle; over his breast
was a great brooch of burnt gold, and in his fist he gripped a pair of
thick-shafted, unburnished spears.

Fionn and the champions looked on this gentleman, and they admired
exceedingly his bearing and equipment.

"Of what blood are you, young gentleman?" Fionn demanded, "and from
which of the four corners of the world do you come?"

"My name is Cael of the Iron," the stranger answered, "and I am son to
the King of Thessaly."

"What errand has brought you here?"

"I do not go on errands," the man replied sternly, "but on the affairs
that please me."

"Be it so. What is the pleasing affair which brings you to this land?"

"Since I left my own country I have not gone from a land or an island
until it paid tribute to me and acknowledged my lordship."

"And you have come to this realm," cried Fionn, doubting his ears.

"For tribute and sovereignty," growled that other, and he struck the
haft of his spear violently on the ground.

"By my hand," said Cona'n, "we have never heard of a warrior, however
great, but his peer was found in Ireland, and the funeral songs of all
such have been chanted by the women of this land."

"By my hand and word," said the harsh stranger, "your talk makes me
think of a small boy or of an idiot."

"Take heed, sir," said Fionn, "for the champions and great dragons of
the Gael are standing by you, and around us there are fourteen battles
of the Fianna of Ireland."

"If all the Fianna who have died in the last seven years were added to
all that are now here," the stranger asserted, "I would treat all of
these and those grievously, and would curtail their limbs and their
lives."

"It is no small boast," Cona'n murmured, staring at him.

"It is no boast at all," said Cael, "and, to show my quality and
standing, I will propose a deed to you."

"Give out your deed," Fionn commanded.

"Thus," said Cael with cold savagery. "If you can find a man among your
fourteen battalions who can outrun or outwrestle or outfight me, I will
take myself off to my own country, and will trouble you no more."

And so harshly did he speak, and with such a belligerent eye did he
stare, that dismay began to seize on the champions, and even Fionn felt
that his breath had halted.

"It is spoken like a hero," he admitted after a moment, "and if you
cannot be matched on those terms it will not be from a dearth of
applicants."

"In running alone," Fionn continued thoughtfully, "we have a notable
champion, Caelte mac Rona'n."

"This son of Rona'n will not long be notable," the stranger asserted.

"He can outstrip the red deer," said Cona'n.

"He can outrun the wind," cried Fionn.

"He will not be asked to outrun the red deer or the wind," the stranger
sneered. "He will be asked to outrun me," he thundered. "Produce this
runner, and we shall discover if he keeps as great heart in his feet as
he has made you think."

"He is not with us," Cona'n lamented.

"These notable warriors are never with us when the call is made," said
the grim stranger.

"By my hand," cried Fionn, "he shall be here in no great time, for I
will fetch him myself."

"Be it so," said Cael. "And during my absence," Fionn continued, "I
leave this as a compact, that you make friends with the Fianna here
present, and that you observe all the conditions and ceremonies of
friendship."

Cael agreed to that.

"I will not hurt any of these people until you return," he said.

Fionn then set out towards Tara of the Kings, for he thought Caelte mac
Romin would surely be there; "and if he is not there," said the champion
to himself, "then I shall find him at Cesh Corran of the Fianna."



