PROSERPINE

    "Sacred Goddess, Mother Earth,
    Thou from whose immortal bosom,
    Gods, and men, and beasts have birth,
    Leaf and blade, and bud and blossom,
    Breathe thine influence most divine
    On thine own child, Proserpine.

    If with mists of evening dew
    Thou dost nourish those young flowers
    Till they grow, in scent and hue,
    Fairest children of the hours,
    Breathe thine influence most divine
    On thine own child, Proserpine."

        Shelley.


The story of Persephone--of Proserpine--is a story of spring. When the
sun is warming the bare brown earth, and the pale primroses look up
through the snowy blackthorns at a kind, blue sky, almost can we hear
the soft wind murmur a name as it gently sways the daffodils and
breathes through the honey sweetness of the gold-powdered catkins on
the grey willows by the river--"Persephone! Persephone!"

Now once there was a time when there was no spring, neither summer nor
autumn, nor chilly winter with its black frosts and cruel gales and
brief, dark days. Always was there sunshine and warmth, ever were
there flowers and corn and fruit, and nowhere did the flowers grow
with more dazzling colours and more fragrant perfume than in the fair
garden of Sicily.

To Demeter, the Earth Mother, was born a daughter more fair than any
flower that grew, and ever more dear to her became her child, the
lovely Proserpine. By the blue sea, in the Sicilian meadows,
Proserpine and the fair nymphs who were her companions spent their
happy days. Too short were the days for all their joy, and Demeter
made the earth yet fairer than it was that she might bring more
gladness to her daughter Proserpine. Each day the blossoms that the
nymphs twined into garlands grew more perfect in form and in hue, but
from the anemones of royal purple and crimson, and the riotous red of
geraniums, Proserpine turned one morning with a cry of gladness, for
there stood before her beside a little stream, on one erect, slim
stem, a wonderful narcissus, with a hundred blossoms. Her eager hand
was stretched out to pluck it, when a sudden black cloud overshadowed
the land, and the nymphs, with shrieks of fear, fled swiftly away. And
as the cloud descended, there was heard a terrible sound, as of the
rushing of many waters or the roll of the heavy wheels of the chariot
of one who comes to slay. Then was the earth cleft open, and from it
there arose the four coal-black horses of Pluto, neighing aloud in
their eagerness, while the dark-browed god urged them on, standing
erect in his car of gold.

    "'The coal-black horses rise--they rise,
    O mother, mother!' low she cries--
    Persephone--Persephone!
    'O light, light, light!' she cries, 'farewell;
    The coal-black horses wait for me.
    O shade of shades, where I must dwell,
    Demeter, mother, far from thee!'"[5]

In cold, strong arms Pluto seized her--in that mighty grasp that will
not be denied, and Proserpine wept childish tears as she shivered at
his icy touch, and sobbed because she had dropped the flowers she had
picked, and had never picked the flower she most desired. While still
she saw the fair light of day, the little oddly-shaped rocky hills,
the vineyards and olive groves and flowery meadows of Sicily, she did
not lose hope. Surely the King of Terrors could not steal one so
young, so happy, and so fair. She had only tasted the joy of living,
and fain she would drink deeper in the coming years. Her mother must
surely save her--her mother who had never yet failed her--her mother,
and the gods.

But ruthless as the mower whose scythe cuts down the seeded grass and
the half-opened flower and lays them in swathes on the meadow, Pluto
drove on. His iron-coloured reins were loose on the black manes of his
horses, and he urged them forward by name till the froth flew from
their mouths like the foam that the furious surf of the sea drives
before it in a storm. Across the bay and along the bank of the river
Anapus they galloped, until, at the river head, they came to the pool
of Cyane. He smote the water with his trident, and downward into the
blackness of darkness his horses passed, and Proserpine knew no more
the pleasant light of day.

    "What ails her that she comes not home?
    Demeter seeks her far and wide,
    And gloomy-browed doth ceaseless roam
    From many a morn till eventide.
    'My life, immortal though it be,
    Is nought,' she cries, 'for want of thee,
    Persephone--Persephone!'"

So, to the great Earth Mother came the pangs that have drawn tears of
blood from many a mortal mother's heart for a child borne off to the
Shades.

    "'My life is nought for want of thee,--
    Persephone! Persephone!'" ...

The cry is borne down through the ages, to echo and re-echo so long as
mothers love and Death is still unchained.

Over land and sea, from where Dawn, the rosy-fingered, rises in the
East, to where Apollo cools the fiery wheels of his chariot in the
waters of far western seas, the goddess sought her daughter. With a
black robe over her head and carrying a flaming torch in either hand,
for nine dreary days she sought her loved one. And yet, for nine more
weary days and nine sleepless nights the goddess, racked by human
sorrow, sat in hopeless misery. The hot sun beat upon her by day. By
night the silver rays from Diana's car smote her more gently, and the
dew drenched her hair and her black garments and mingled with the
saltness of her bitter tears. At the grey dawning of the tenth day her
elder daughter, Hecate, stood beside her. Queen of ghosts and shades
was she, and to her all dark places of the earth were known.

"Let us go to the Sun God," said Hecate. "Surely he hath seen the god
who stole away the little Proserpine. Soon his chariot will drive
across the heavens. Come, let us ask him to guide us to the place
where she is hidden."

Thus did they come to the chariot of the glorious Apollo, and standing
by the heads of his horses like two grey clouds that bar the passage
of the sun, they begged him to tell them the name of him who had
stolen fair Proserpine.

"No less a thief was he," said Apollo, "than Pluto, King of Darkness
and robber of Life itself. Mourn not, Demeter. Thy daughter is safe in
his keeping. The little nymph who played in the meadows is now Queen
of the Shades. Nor does Pluto love her vainly. She is now in love with
Death."

No comfort did the words of the Sun God bring to the longing soul of
Demeter. And her wounded heart grew bitter. Because she suffered,
others must suffer as well. Because she mourned, all the world must
mourn. The fragrant flowers spoke to her only of Persephone, the
purple grapes reminded her of a vintage when the white fingers of her
child had plucked the fruit. The waving golden grain told her that
Persephone was as an ear of wheat that is reaped before its time.

Then upon the earth did there come dearth and drought and barrenness.

    "The wheat
    Was blighted in the ear, the purple grapes
    Blushed no more on the vines, and all the gods
    Were sorrowful ..."

        Lewis Morris.

Gods and men alike suffered from the sorrow of Demeter. To her, in
pity for the barren earth, Zeus sent an embassy, but in vain it came.
Merciless was the great Earth Mother, who had been robbed of what she
held most dear.

"Give me back my child!" she said. "Gladly I watch the sufferings of
men, for no sorrow is as my sorrow. Give me back my child, and the
earth shall grow fertile once more."

Unwillingly Zeus granted the request of Demeter.

"She shall come back," he said at last, "and with thee dwell on earth
forever. Yet only on one condition do I grant thy fond request.
Persephone must eat no food through all the time of her sojourn in the
realm of Pluto, else must thy beseeching be all in vain."

Then did Demeter gladly leave Olympus and hasten down to the darkness
of the shadowy land that once again she might hold, in her strong
mother's arms, her who had once been her little clinging child.

But in the dark kingdom of Pluto a strange thing had happened. No
longer had the pale-faced god, with dark locks, and eyes like the
sunless pools of a mountain stream, any terrors for Proserpine. He was
strong, and cruel had she thought him, yet now she knew that the touch
of his strong, cold hands was a touch of infinite tenderness. When,
knowing the fiat of the ruler of Olympus, Pluto gave to his stolen
bride a pomegranate, red in heart as the heart of a man, she had taken
it from his hand, and, because he willed it, had eaten of the sweet
seeds. Then, in truth, it was too late for Demeter to save her child.
She "had eaten of Love's seed" and "changed into another."

    "He takes the cleft pomegranate seeds:
    'Love, eat with me this parting day;'
    Then bids them fetch the coal-black steeds--
    'Demeter's daughter, wouldst away?'
    The gates of Hades set her free;
    'She will return full soon,' saith he--
    'My wife, my wife Persephone.'"

        Ingelow.

Dark, dark was the kingdom of Pluto. Its rivers never mirrored a
sunbeam, and ever moaned low as an earthly river moans before a coming
flood, and the feet that trod the gloomy Cocytus valley were the feet
of those who never again would tread on the soft grass and flowers of
an earthly meadow. Yet when Demeter had braved all the shadows of
Hades, only in part was her end accomplished. In part only was
Proserpine now her child, for while half her heart was in the
sunshine, rejoicing in the beauties of earth, the other half was with
the god who had taken her down to the Land of Darkness and there had
won her for his own. Back to the flowery island of Sicily her mother
brought her, and the peach trees and the almonds blossomed snowily as
she passed. The olives decked themselves with their soft grey leaves,
the corn sprang up, green and lush and strong. The lemon and orange
groves grew golden with luscious fruit, and all the land was carpeted
with flowers. For six months of the year she stayed, and gods and men
rejoiced at the bringing back of Proserpine. For six months she left
her green and pleasant land for the dark kingdom of him whom she
loved, and through those months the trees were bare, and the earth
chill and brown, and under the earth the flowers hid themselves in
fear and awaited the return of the fair daughter of Demeter.

And evermore has she come and gone, and seedtime and harvest have
never failed, and the cold, sleeping world has awaked and rejoiced,
and heralded with the song of birds, and the bursting of green buds
and the blooming of flowers, the resurrection from the dead--the
coming of spring.

    "Time calls, and Change
    Commands both men and gods, and speeds us on
    We know not whither; but the old earth smiles
    Spring after spring, and the seed bursts again
    Out of its prison mould, and the dead lives
    Renew themselves, and rise aloft and soar
    And are transformed, clothing themselves with change,
    Till the last change be done."

        Lewis Morris.


FOOTNOTE:

[5] Jean Ingelow.