ARACHNE


The hay that so short a time ago was long, lush grass, with fragrant
meadow-sweet and gold-eyed marguerites growing amongst it in the green
meadow-land by the river, is now dry hay--fragrant still, though dead,
and hidden from the sun's warm rays underneath the dark wooden rafters
of the barn. Occasionally a cat on a hunting foray comes into the barn
to look for mice, or to nestle cosily down into purring slumber. Now
and then a hen comes furtively tip-toeing through the open door and
makes for itself a secret nest in which to lay the eggs which it
subsequently heralds with such loud clucks of proud rejoicing as to
completely undo all its previous precautions. Sometimes children come
in, pursuing cat or hen, or merely to tumble each other over amongst
the soft hay which they leave in chaotic confusion, and when they have
gone away, a little more of the sky can be seen through the little
window in the roof, and through the wooden bars of the window lower
down. Yet, whatever other living creatures may come or go, by those
windows of the barn, and high up on its dark rafters, there is always
a living creature working, ceaselessly working. When, through the
skylight, the sun-god drives a golden sunbeam, and a long shaft of
dancing dust-atoms passes from the window to what was once a part of
the early summer's glory, the work of the unresting toiler is also to
be seen, for the window is hung with shimmering grey tapestries made
by Arachne, the spider, and from rafter to rafter her threads are
suspended with inimitable skill.

She was a nymph once, they say--the daughter of Idmon the dyer, of
Colophon, a city of Lydia. In all Lydia there was none who could weave
as wove the beautiful Arachne. To watch her card the wool of the
white-fleeced sheep until in her fingers it grew like the soft clouds
that hang round the hill tops, was pleasure enough to draw nymphs from
the golden river Pactolus and from the vineyards of Tymolus. And when
she drove her swift shuttle hither and thither, still it was joy to
watch her wondrous skill. Magical was the growth of the web, fine of
woof, that her darting fingers span, and yet more magical the
exquisite devices that she then wrought upon it. For birds and flowers
and butterflies and pictures of all the beautiful things on earth were
limned by Arachne, and old tales grew alive again under her creative
needle.

To Pallas Athené, goddess of craftsmen, came tidings that at Colophon
in Lydia lived a nymph whose skill rivalled that of the goddess
herself, and she, ever jealous for her own honour, took on herself the
form of a woman bent with age, and, leaning on her staff, joined the
little crowd that hung round Arachne as she plied her busy needle.
With white arms twined round each other the eager nymphs watched the
flowers spring up under her fingers, even as flowers spring from the
ground on the coming of Demeter, and Athené was fain to admire, while
she marvelled at the magic skill of the fair Arachne.

Gently she spoke to Arachne, and, with the persuasive words of a wise
old woman, warned her that she must not let her ambition soar too
high. Greater than all skilled craftswomen was the great goddess
Athené, and were Arachne, in impious vanity, to dream that one day she
might equal her, that were indeed a crime for any god to punish.

Glancing up for a moment from the picture whose perfect colours grew
fast under her slim fingers, Arachne fixed scornful eyes on the old
woman and gave a merry laugh.

"Didst say _equal_ Athené? old mother," she said. "In good sooth thy
dwelling must be with the goat-herds in the far-off hills and thou art
not a dweller in our city. Else hadst thou not spoken to Arachne of
_equalling_ the work of Athené; _excelling_ were the better word."

In anger Pallas Athené made answer.

"Impious one!" she said, "to those who would make themselves higher
than the gods must ever come woe unutterable. Take heed what thou
sayest, for punishment will assuredly be thine."

Laughing still, Arachne made reply:

"I fear not, Athené, nor does my heart shake at the gloomy warning of
a foolish old crone." And turning to the nymphs who, half afraid,
listened to her daring words, she said: "Fair nymphs who watch me day
by day, well do ye know that I make no idle boast. My skill is as
great as that of Athené, and greater still it shall be. Let Athené try
a contest with me if she dare! Well do I know who will be the victor."

Then Athené cast off her disguise, and before the frightened nymphs
and the bold Arachne stood the radiant goddess with eyes that blazed
with anger and insulted pride.

"Lo, Athené is come!" she said, and nymphs and women fell on their
knees before her, humbly adoring. Arachne alone was unabashed. Her
cheeks showed how fast her heart was beating. From rosy red to white
went the colour in them, yet, in firm, low voice she spoke.

"I have spoken truth," she said. "Not woman, nor goddess, can do work
such as mine. Ready am I to abide by what I have said, and if I did
boast, by my boast I stand. If thou wilt deign, great goddess, to try
thy skill against the skill of the dyer's daughter and dost prove the
victor, behold me gladly willing to pay the penalty."

The eyes of Athené, the grey-eyed goddess, grew dark as the sea when a
thunder-cloud hangs over it and a mighty storm is coming. Not for one
moment did she delay, but took her place by the side of Arachne. On
the loom they stretched out two webs with a fine warp, and made them
fast on the beam.

    "The sley separates the warp, the woof is inserted in
    the middle with sharp shuttles, which the fingers hurry
    along, and, being drawn within the warp, the teeth
    notched in the moving sley strike it. Both hasten on,
    and girding up their garments to their breasts, they
    move their skilful arms, their eagerness beguiling their
    fatigue. There both the purple is being woven, which is
    subjected to the Tyrian brazen vessel, and fine shades
    of minute difference; just as the rainbow, with its
    mighty arch, is wont to tint a long tract of sky by
    means of the rays reflected by the shower; in which,
    though a thousand different colours are shining, yet the
    very transition eludes the eyes that look upon it....
    There, too, the pliant gold is mixed with the threads."

        Ovid.

Their canvases wrought, then did Athené and Arachne hasten to cover
them with pictures such as no skilled worker of tapestry has ever
since dreamed of accomplishing. Under the fingers of Athené grew up
pictures so real and so perfect that the watchers knew not whether the
goddess was indeed creating life. And each picture was one that told
of the omnipotence of the gods and of the doom that came upon those
mortals who had dared in their blasphemous presumption to struggle as
equals with the immortal dwellers in Olympus. Arachne glanced up from
her web and looked with eyes that glowed with the love of beautiful
things at the creations of Athené. Yet, undaunted, her fingers still
sped on, and the goddess saw, with brow that grew yet more clouded,
how the daughter of Idmon the dyer had chosen for subjects the tales
that showed the weaknesses of the gods. One after another the living
pictures grew beneath her hand, and the nymphs held their breath in
mingled fear and ecstasy at Arachne's godlike skill and most arrogant
daring. Between goddess and mortal none could have chosen, for the
colour and form and exquisite fancy of the pictures of the daughter of
Zeus were equalled, though not excelled, by those of the daughter of
the dyer of Colophon.

Darker and yet more dark grew the eyes of Athené as they looked on
the magical beauty of the pictures, each one of which was an insult to
the gods. What picture had skilful hand ever drawn to compare with
that of Europa who,

    "riding on the back of the divine bull, with one hand
    clasped the beast's great horn, and with the other
    caught up her garment's purple fold, lest it might trail
    and be drenched in the hoar sea's infinite spray. And
    her deep robe was blown out in the wind, like the sail
    of a ship, and lightly ever it wafted the maiden
    onward."

        Moschus.

Then at last did the storm break, and with her shuttle the enraged
goddess smote the web of Arachne, and the fair pictures were rent into
motley rags and ribbons. Furiously, too, with her shuttle of boxwood
she smote Arachne. Before her rage, the nymphs fled back to their
golden river and to the vineyards of Tymolus, and the women of
Colophon in blind terror rushed away. And Arachne, shamed to the dust,
knew that life for her was no longer worth possessing. She had
aspired, in the pride of her splendid genius, to a contest with a god,
and knew now that such a contest must ever be vain. A cord hung from
the weaver's beam, and swiftly she seized it, knotted it round her
white neck, and would have hanged herself. But ere the life had passed
out of her, Athené grasped the cord, loosened it, and spoke Arachne's
doom:

"Live!" she said, "O guilty and shameless one! For evermore shalt thou
live and hang as now, thou and thy descendants, that men may never
forget the punishment of the blasphemous one who dared to rival a
god."

Even as she spoke, Arachne's fair form dried up and withered. Her
straight limbs grew grey and crooked and wiry, and her white arms were
no more. And from the beam where the beautiful weaver of Lydia had
been suspended, there hung from a fine grey thread the creature from
which, to this day, there are but few who do not turn with loathing.
Yet still Arachne spins, and still is without a compeer.

    "Not anie damzell, which her vaunteth most
    In skilfull knitting of soft silken twyne,
    Nor anie weaver, which his worke doth boast
    In dieper, in damaske, or in lyne,
    Nor anie skil'd in workmanship embost,
    Nor anie skil'd in loupes of fingring fine,
    Might in their divers cunning ever dare
    With this so curious networke to compare."

        Spenser.

Thus, perhaps, does Arachne have her compensations, and in days that
followed long after the twilight of the gods, did she not gain eternal
honour in the heart of every Scot by the tale of how she saved a
national hero? Kindly, too, are her labours for men as she slays their
mortal enemies, the household flies, and when the peasant--practical,
if not favoured by Æsculapius and Hygeia--runs to raid the loom of
Arachne in order to staunch the quick-flowing blood from the cut hand
of her little child, much more dear to her heart is Arachne the spider
than the unknown Athené.

    "Also in spinners be tokens of divination, and of
    knowing what weather shall fall--for oft by weathers
    that shall fall, some spin or weave higher or lower.
    Also multitude of spinners is token of much
    rain."

        Bartholomew.

The sun has not long enough shown his face to dry up the dew in the
garden, and behold on the little clipped tree of boxwood, a great
marvel! For in and out, and all over its twigs and leaves, Arachne has
woven her web, and on the web the dew has dropped a million diamond
drops. And, suddenly, all the colours in the sky are mirrored
dazzlingly on the grey tapestry of her making. Arachne has come to her
own again.