DEIRDRÊ

    "Her beauty filled the old world of the Gael with a
    sweet, wonderful, and abiding rumour. The name of
    Deirdrê has been as a harp to a thousand poets. In a
    land of heroes and brave and beautiful women, how shall
    one name survive? Yet to this day and for ever, men will
    remember Deirdrê...."

        Fiona Macleod.


So long ago, that it was before the birth of our Lord, so says
tradition, there was born that

          "Morning star of loveliness,
    Unhappy Helen of a Western land,"

who is known to the Celts of Scotland as Darthool, to those of Ireland
as Deirdrê. As in the story of Helen, it is not easy, or even possible
in the story of Deirdrê, to disentangle the old, old facts of actual
history from the web of romantic fairy tale that time has woven about
them, yet so great is the power of Deirdrê, even unto this day, that
it has been the fond task of those men and women to whom the Gael owes
so much, to preserve, and to translate for posterity, the tragic
romance of Deirdrê the Beautiful and the Sons of Usna.

In many ancient manuscripts we get the story in more or less complete
form. In the Advocates' Library of Edinburgh, in the Glenmasan MS. we
get the best and the fullest version, while the oldest and the
shortest is to be found in the twelfth-century _Book of Leinster_.

But those who would revel in the old tale and have Deirdrê lead them
by the hand into the enchanted realm of the romance of misty, ancient
days of our Western Isles must go for help to Fiona Macleod, to
Alexander Carmichael, to Lady Gregory, to Dr. Douglas Hyde, to W. F.
Skene, to W. B. Yeats, to J. M. Synge, and to those others who, like
true descendants of the Druids, possess the power of unlocking the
entrance gates of the Green Islands of the Blest.

Conchubar, or Conor, ruled the kingdom of the Ultonians, now Ulster,
when Deirdrê was born in Erin. All the most famous warriors of his
time, heroes whose mighty deeds live on in legend, and whose title was
"The Champions of the Red Branch," he gathered round him, and all
through Erin and Alba rang the fame of the warlike Ultonians.

There came a day when Conor and his champions, gorgeous in their gala
dress of crimson tunic with brooches of inlaid gold and white-hooded
shirt embroidered in red gold, went to a feast in the house of one
called Felim. Felim was a bard, and because not only was his arm in
war strong and swift to strike, but because, in peace, his fingers
could draw the sweetest of music from his harp, he was dear to the
king. As they feasted, Conor beheld a dark shadow of horror and of
grief fall on the face of Cathbad, a Druid who had come in his train,
and saw that his aged eyes were gazing far into the Unseen. Speedily
he bade him tell him what evil thing it was that he saw, and Cathbad
turned to the childless Felim and told him that to his wife there was
about to be born a daughter, with eyes like stars that are mirrored
by night in the water, with lips red as the rowan berries and teeth
more white than pearls; with a voice more sweet than the music of
fairy harps. "A maiden fair, tall, long haired, for whom champions
will contend ... and mighty kings be envious of her lovely, faultless
form." For her sweet sake, he said, more blood should be spilt in Erin
than for generations and ages past, and many heroes and bright torches
of the Gaels should lose their lives. For love of her, three heroes of
eternal renown must give their lives away, the sea in which her starry
eyes should mirror themselves would be a sea of blood, and woe
unutterable should come on the sons of Erin. Then up spoke the lords
of the Red Branch, and grimly they looked at Felim the Harper:

"If the babe that thy wife is about to bear is to bring such evil upon
our land, better that thou shouldst shed her innocent blood ere she
spills the blood of our nation."

And Felim made answer:

"It is well spoken. Bitter it is for my wife and for me to lose a
child so beautiful, yet shall I slay her that my land may be saved
from such a doom."

But Conor, the king, spoke then, and because the witchery of the
perfect beauty and the magic charm of Deirdrê was felt by him even
before she was born, he said: "She shall not die. Upon myself I take
the doom. The child shall be kept apart from all men until she is of
an age to wed. Then shall I take her for my wife, and none shall dare
to contend for her."

His voice had barely ceased, when a messenger came to Felim to tell
him that a daughter was born to him, and on his heels came a
procession of chanting women, bearing the babe on a flower-decked
cushion. And all who saw the tiny thing, with milk-white skin, and
locks "more yellow than the western gold of the summer sun," looked on
her with the fear that even the bravest heart feels on facing the
Unknown. And Cathbad spoke: "Let Deirdrê be her name, sweet menace
that she is." And the babe gazed up with starry eyes at the
white-haired Druid as he chanted to her:

    "_Many will be jealous of your face, O flame of beauty;
    for your sake heroes shall go to exile. For there is
    harm in your face; it will bring banishment and death on
    the sons of kings. In your fate, O beautiful child, are
    wounds and ill-doings, and shedding of blood._

    "_You will have a little grave apart to yourself; you
    will be a tale of wonder for ever, Deirdrê._"

        Lady Gregory's Translation.

As Conor commanded, Deirdrê, the little "babe of destiny," was left
with her mother for only a month and a day, and then was sent with a
nurse and with Cathbad the Druid to a lonely island, thickly wooded,
and only accessible by a sort of causeway at low tide. Here she grew
into maidenhood, and each day became more fair. She had instruction
from Cathbad in religion and in all manner of wisdom, and it would
seem as though she also learned from him some of that mystical power
that enabled her to see things hidden from human eyes.

"Tell me," one day she asked her teacher, "who made the stars, the
firmament above, the earth, the flowers, both thee and me?"

And Cathbad answered: "God. But who God is, alas! no man can say."

Then Deirdrê, an impetuous child, seized the druidical staff from the
hand of Cathbad, broke it in two, and flung the pieces far out on the
water. "Ah, Cathbad!" she cried, "there shall come One in the dim
future for whom all your Druid spells and charms are naught."

Then seeing Cathbad hang his head, and a tear trickle down his face,
for he knew that the child spoke truth, the child, grieved at giving
pain to the friend whom she loved, threw her arms about the old man's
neck, and by her kisses strove to comfort him.

As Deirdrê grew older, Conor sent one from his court to educate her in
all that any queen should know. They called her the Lavarcam, which,
in our tongue, really means the Gossip, and she was one of royal blood
who belonged to a class that in those days had been trained to be
chroniclers, or story-tellers. The Lavarcam was a clever woman, and
she marvelled at the wondrous beauty of the child she came to teach,
and at her equally marvellous mind.

One winter day, when the snow lay deep, it came to pass that Deirdrê
saw lying on the snow a calf that had been slain for her food. The red
blood that ran from its neck had brought a black raven swooping down
upon the snow. And to Lavarcam Deirdrê said: "If there were a man who
had hair of the blackness of that raven, skin of the whiteness of the
snow, and cheeks as red as the blood that stains its whiteness, to him
should I give my heart."

And Lavarcam, without thought, made answer:

"One I know whose skin is whiter than the snow, whose cheeks are ruddy
as the blood that stained the snow, and whose hair is black and glossy
as the raven's wing. He has eyes of the darkest blue of the sky, and
head and shoulders is he above all the men of Erin."

"And what will be the name of that man, Lavarcam?" asked Deirdrê. "And
whence is he, and what his degree?"

And Lavarcam made answer that he of whom she spoke was Naoise, one of
the three sons of Usna, a great lord of Alba, and that these three
sons were mighty champions who had been trained at the famed military
school at Sgathaig[14] in the Isle of Skye.

Then said Deirdrê: "My love shall be given to none but Naoise, son of
Usna. To him shall it belong forever."

From that day forward, Naoise held kingship over the thoughts and
dreams of Deirdrê.

And when Lavarcam saw how deep her careless words had sunk into the
heart of the maiden, she grew afraid, and tried to think of a means by
which to undo the harm which, in her thoughtlessness, she had wrought.

Now Conor had made a law that none but Cathbad, Lavarcam, and the
nurse of Deirdrê should pass through the forest that led to her
hiding-place, and that none but they should look upon her until his
own eyes beheld her and he took her for his wife. But as Lavarcam one
day came from seeing Deirdrê, and from listening to her many eager
questions about Naoise, she met a swineherd, rough in looks and
speech, and clad in the pelt of a deer, and with him two rough
fellows, bondmen of the Ultonians, and to her quick mind there came a
plan. Thus she bade them follow her into the forbidden forest and
there to remain, by the side of a well, until they should hear the
bark of a fox and the cry of a jay. Then they were to walk slowly on
through the woods, speaking to none whom they might meet, and still
keeping silence when they were again out of the shadow of the trees.

Then Lavarcam sped back to Deirdrê and begged her to come with her to
enjoy the beauty of the woods. In a little, Lavarcam strayed away from
her charge, and soon the cry of a jay and the bark of a fox were
heard, and while Deirdrê still marvelled at the sounds that came so
close together, Lavarcam returned. Nor had she been back a minute
before three men came through the trees and slowly walked past, close
to where Lavarcam and Deirdrê were hidden.

"I have never seen men so near before," said Deirdrê. "Only from the
outskirts of the forest have I seen them very far away. Who are these
men, who bring no joy to my eyes?"

And Lavarcam made answer: "These are Naoise, Ardan, and Ainle--the
three sons of Usna."

But Deirdrê looked hard at Lavarcam, and scorn and laughter were in
her merry eyes.

"Then shall I have speech with Naoise, Ardan, and Ainle," she said,
and ere Lavarcam could stop her, she had flitted through the trees by
a path amongst the fern, and stood suddenly before the three men.

And the rough hinds, seeing such perfect loveliness, made very sure
that Deirdrê was one of the _sidhe_[15] and stared at her with the
round eyes and gaping mouths of wondering terror.

For a moment Deirdrê gazed at them. Then: "Are ye the Sons of Usna?"
she asked.

And when they stood like stocks, frightened and stupid, she lashed
them with her mockery, until the swineherd could no more, and blurted
out the whole truth to this most beautiful of all the world. Then,
very gently, like pearls from a silver string, the words fell from the
rowan-red lips of Deirdrê: "I blame thee not, poor swineherd," she
said, "and that thou mayst know that I deem thee a true man, I would
fain ask thee to do one thing for me."

And when the eyes of the herd met the eyes of Deirdrê, a soul was born
in him, and he knew things of which he never before had dreamed.

"If I can do one thing to please thee, that will I do," he said. "Aye,
and gladly pay for it with my life. Thenceforth my life is thine."

And Deirdrê said: "I would fain see Naoise, one of the Sons of Usna."

And once more the swineherd said: "My life is thine."

Then Deirdrê, seeing in his eyes a very beautiful thing, stooped and
kissed the swineherd on his weather-beaten, tanned forehead.

"Go, then," she said, "to Naoise. Tell him that I, Deirdrê, dream of
him all the night and think of him all the day, and that I bid him
meet me here to-morrow an hour before the setting of the sun."

The swineherd watched her flit into the shadows of the trees, and then
went on his way, through the snowy woods, that he might pay with his
life for the kiss that Deirdrê had given him.

Sorely puzzled was Lavarcam over the doings of Deirdrê that day, for
Deirdrê told her not a word of what had passed between her and the
swineherd. On the morrow, when she left her to go back to the court of
King Conor, she saw, as she drew near Emain Macha, where he stayed,
black wings that flapped over something that lay on the snow. At her
approach there rose three ravens, three kites, and three hoodie-crows,
and she saw that their prey was the body of the swineherd with gaping
spear-wounds all over him. Yet even then he looked happy. He had died
laughing, and there was still a smile on his lips. Faithfully had he
delivered his message, and when he had spoken of the beauty of
Deirdrê, rumour of his speech had reached the king, and the spears of
Conor's men had enabled him to make true the words he had said to
Deirdrê: "I will pay for it with my life." In this way was shed the
first blood of that great sea of blood that was spilt for the love of
Deirdrê, the Beauty of the World.

From where the swineherd lay, Lavarcam went to the camp of the Sons
of Usna, and to Naoise she told the story of the love that Deirdrê
bore him, and counselled him to come to the place where she was
hidden, and behold her beauty. And Naoise, who had seen how even a
rough clod of a hind could achieve the noble chivalry of a race of
kings for her dear sake, felt his heart throb within him. "I will
come," he said to Lavarcam.

Days passed, and Deirdrê waited, very sure that Naoise must come to
her at last. And one day she heard a song of magical sweetness coming
through the trees. Three voices sung the song, and it was as though
one of the _sidhe_ played a harp to cast a spell upon men. The voice
of Ainle, youngest of the Sons of Usna, was like the sweet upper
strings of the harp, that of Ardan the strings in the middle, and the
voice of Naoise was like the strings whose deep resonance can play
upon the hearts of warriors and move them to tears. Then Deirdrê knew
that she heard the voice of her beloved, and she sped to him as a bird
speeds to her mate. Even as Lavarcam had told her was Naoise, eldest
of the Sons of Usna, but no words had been able to tell Naoise of the
beauty of Deirdrê.

    "It was as though a sudden flood of sunshine burst forth
    in that place. For a woman came from the thicket more
    beautiful than any dream he had ever dreamed. She was
    clad in a saffron robe over white that was like the
    shining of the sun on foam of the sea, and this was
    claspt with great bands of yellow gold, and over her
    shoulders was the rippling flood of her hair, the sprays
    of which lightened into delicate fire, and made a mist
    before him, in the which he could see her eyes like two
    blue pools wherein purple shadows dreamed."

        Fiona Macleod.

From that moment Naoise "gave his love to Deirdrê above every other
creature," and their souls rushed together and were one for evermore.
It was for them the beginning of a perfect love, and so sure were they
of that love from the very first moment that it seemed as though they
must have been born loving one another.

Of that love they talked, of the anger of Conor when he knew that his
destined bride was the love of Naoise, and together they planned how
it was best for Deirdrê to escape from the furious wrath of the king
who desired her for his own.

Of a sudden, the hands of Naoise gripped the iron-pointed javelin that
hung by his side, and drove it into a place where the snow weighed
down the bracken.

"Is it a wolf?" cried Deirdrê.

And Naoise made answer: "Either a dead man, or the mark of where a man
has lain hidden thou wilt find under the bracken."

And when they went to look they found, like the clap of a hare, the
mark of where a man had lain hidden, and close beside the javelin that
was driven in the ground there lay a wooden-hilted knife.

Then said Naoise: "Well I knew that Conor would set a spy on my
tracks. Come with me now, Deirdrê, else may I lose thee forever."

And with a glad heart Deirdrê went with him who was to be her lord,
and Naoise took her to where his brothers awaited his coming. To
Deirdrê, both Ainle and Ardan swiftly gave their lifelong allegiance
and their love, but they were full of forebodings for her and for
Naoise because of the certain wrath of Conor, the king.

Then said Naoise: "Although harm should come, for her dear sake I am
willing to live in disgrace for the rest of my days."

And Ardan and Ainle made answer: "Of a certainty, evil will be of it,
yet though there be, thou shalt not be under disgrace as long as we
shall be alive. We will go with her to another country. There is not
in Erin a king who will not bid us welcome."

Then did the Sons of Usna decide to cross the Sea of Moyle, and in
their own land of Alba to find a happy sanctuary. That night they
fled, and with them took three times fifty men, three times fifty
women, three times fifty horses, and three times fifty greyhounds. And
when they looked back to where they had had their dwelling, they saw
red flames against the deep blue sky of the night, and knew that the
vengeance of Conor had already begun. And first they travelled round
Erin from Essa to Beinn Etair,[16] and then in a great black galley
they set sail, and Deirdrê had a heart light as the white-winged
sea-birds as the men pulled at the long oars and sang together a
rowing song, and she leaned on the strong arm of Naoise and saw the
blue coast-line of Erin fading into nothingness.

In the bay of Aros, on the eastern shores of the island of Mull, they
found their first resting-place, but there they feared treachery from
a lord of Appin. For the starry eyes of Deirdrê were swift to discern
evil that the eyes of the Sons of Usna could not see. Thus they fared
onward until they reached the great sea-loch of Etive, with hills
around it, and Ben Cruachan, its head in mist, towering above it like
a watchman placed there by Time, to wait and to watch over the people
of those silent hills and lonely glens until Time should give place to
his brother, Eternity.

Joy was in the hearts of the three Sons of Usna when they came back to
the home of their fathers. Usna was dead, but beyond the Falls of Lora
was still the great dun--the vitrified fort--which he had built for
himself and for those who should follow him.

For Deirdrê then began a time of perfect happiness. Naoise was her
heart, but very dear to her also were the brothers of Naoise, and each
of the three vied with one another in their acts of tender and loving
service. Their thrice fifty vassals had no love for Alba, and rejoiced
when their lord, Naoise, allowed them to return to Erin, but the Sons
of Usna were glad to have none to come between them and their serving
of Deirdrê, the queen of their hearts. Soon she came to know well each
little bay, each beach, and each little lonely glen of Loch Etive, for
the Sons of Usna did not always stay at the dun which had been their
father's, but went a-hunting up the loch. At various spots on the
shores of Etive they had camping places, and at Dail-an-eas[17] they
built for Deirdrê a sunny bower.

On a sloping bank above the waterfall they built the little nest,
thatched with the royal fern of the mountains, the red clay of the
pools, and with soft feathers from the breasts of birds. There she
could sit and listen to the murmur and drip of the clear water over
the mossy boulders, the splash of the salmon in the dark pools, and
see the distant silver of the loch. When the summer sun was hot on the
bog myrtle and heather, the hum of the wild bees would lull her to
sleep, and in autumn, when the bracken grew red and golden and the
rowan berries grew red as Deirdrê's lips, her keen eyes would see the
stags grazing high up among the grey boulders of the mist-crowned
mountains, and would warn the brothers of the sport awaiting them. The
crow of the grouse, the belling of stags, the bark of the hill-fox,
the swish of the great wings of the golden eagle, the song of birds,
the lilt of running water, the complaining of the wind through the
birches--all these things made music to Deirdrê, to whom all things
were dear.

"_Is tu mein na Dearshul agha_"--"The tenderness of heartsweet
Deirdrê"--so runs a line in an old, old Gaelic verse, and it is always
of her tenderness as well as her beauty that the old _Oea_ speak.

Sometimes she would hunt the red deer with Naoise and his brothers, up
the lonely glens, up through the clouds to the silent mountain tops,
and in the evening, when she was weary, her three loyal worshippers
would proudly bear her home upon their bucklers.

So the happy days passed away, and in Erin the angry heart of Conor
grew yet more angry when tidings came to him of the happiness of
Deirdrê and the Sons of Usna. Rumour came to him that the king of
Alba had planned to come against Naoise, to slay him, and to take
Deirdrê for his wife, but that ere he could come the Sons of Usna and
Deirdrê had sailed yet further north in their galley, and that there,
in the land of his mother, Naoise ruled as a king. And not only on
Loch Etive, but on Loch Awe and Loch Fyne, Loch Striven, Loch Ard,
Loch Long, Loch Lomond and all along the sea-loch coast, the fame of
the Sons of Usna spread, and the wonder of the beauty of Deirdrê,
fairest of women.

And ever the hatred of Conor grew, until one day there came into his
mind a plan of evil by which his burning thirst for revenge might be
handsomely assuaged.

He made, therefore, a great feast, at which all the heroes of the Red
Branch were present. When he had done them every honour, he asked them
if they were content. As one man: "Well content indeed!" answered
they.

"And that is what I am not," said the king. Then with the guile of
fair words he told them that to him it was great sorrow that the three
heroes, with whose deeds the Western Isles and the whole of the north
and west of Alba were ringing, should not be numbered amongst his
friends, sit at his board in peace and amity, and fight for the
Ultonians like all the other heroes of the Red Branch.

"They took from me the one who would have been my wife," he said, "yet
even that I can forgive, and if they would return to Erin, glad would
my welcome be."

At these words there was great rejoicing amongst the lords of the Red
Branch and all those who listened, and Conor, glad at heart, said,
"My three best champions shall go to bring them back from their
exile," and he named Conall the Victorious, Cuchulainn, and Fergus,
the son of Rossa the Red. Then secretly he called Conall to him and
asked him what he would do if he were sent to fetch the Sons of Usna,
and, in spite of his safe-conduct, they were slain when they reached
the land of the Ultonians. And Conall made answer that should such a
shameful thing come to pass he would slay with his own hand all the
traitor dogs. Then he sent for Cuchulainn, and to him put the same
question, and, in angry scorn, the young hero replied that even Conor
himself would not be safe from his vengeance were such a deed of black
treachery to be performed.

"Well did I know thou didst bear me no love," said Conor, and black
was his brow.

He called for Fergus then, and Fergus, sore troubled, made answer that
were there to be such a betrayal, the king alone would be held sacred
from his vengeance.

Then Conor gladly gave Fergus command to go to Alba as his emissary,
and to fetch back with him the three brothers and Deirdrê the
Beautiful.

"Thy name of old was Honeymouth," he said, "so I know well that with
guile thou canst bring them to Erin. And when thou shalt have returned
with them, send them forward, but stay thyself at the house of
Borrach. Borrach shall have warning of thy coming."

This he said, because to Fergus and to all the other of the Red
Branch, a _geasa_, or pledge, was sacrosanct. And well he knew that
Fergus had as one of his _geasa_ that he would never refuse an
invitation to a feast.

Next day Fergus and his two sons, Illann the Fair and Buinne the Red,
set out in their galley for the dun of the Sons of Usna on Loch Etive.

The day before their hurried flight from Erin, Ainle and Ardan had
been playing chess in their dun with Conor, the king. The board was of
fair ivory, and the chessmen were of red-gold, wrought in strange
devices. It had come from the mysterious East in years far beyond the
memory of any living man, and was one of the dearest of Conor's
possessions. Thus, when Ainle and Ardan carried off the chess-board
with them in their flight, after the loss of Deirdrê, that was the
loss that gave the king the greatest bitterness. Now it came to pass
that as Naoise and Deirdrê were sitting in front of their dun, the
little waves of Loch Etive lapping up on the seaweed, yellow as the
hair of Deirdrê, far below, and playing chess at this board, they
heard a shout from the woods down by the shore where the hazels and
birches grew thick.

"That is the voice of a man of Erin!" said Naoise, and stopped in his
game to listen.

But Deirdrê said, very quickly: "Not so! It is the voice of a Gael of
Alba."

Yet so she spoke that she might try to deceive her own heart, that
even then was chilled by the black shadow of an approaching evil. Then
came another shout, and yet a third. And when they heard the third
shout, there was no doubt left in their minds, for they all knew the
voice for that of Fergus, the son of Rossa the Red. And when Ardan
hastened down to the harbour to greet him, Deirdrê confessed to Naoise
why she had refused at first to own that it was a voice from Erin that
she heard.

"I saw in a dream last night," she said, "three birds that flew hither
from Emain Macha, carrying three sips of honey in their beaks. The
honey they left with us, but took away three sips of blood."

And Naoise said: "What then, best beloved, dost thou read from this
dream of thine?"

And Deirdrê said: "I read that Fergus comes from Conor with honeyed
words of peace, but behind his treacherous words lies death."

As they spake, Ardan and Fergus and his following climbed up the
height where the bog-myrtle and the heather and sweet fern yielded
their sweetest incense as they were wounded under their firm tread.

And when Fergus stood before Deirdrê and Naoise, the man of her heart,
he told them of Conor's message, and of the peace and the glory that
awaited them in Erin if they would but listen to the words of welcome
that he brought.

Then said Naoise: "I am ready." But his eyes dared not meet the
sea-blue eyes of Deirdrê, his queen.

"Knowest thou that my pledge is one of honour?" asked Fergus.

"I know it well," said Naoise.

So in joyous feasting was that night spent, and only over the heart
of Deirdrê hung that black cloud of sorrow to come, of woe
unspeakable.

When the golden dawn crept over the blue hills of Loch Etive, and the
white-winged birds of the sea swooped and dived and cried in the
silver waters, the galley of the Sons of Usna set out to sea.

And Deirdrê, over whom hung a doom she had not the courage to name,
sang a song at parting:

THE LAY OF DEIRDRE

    "Beloved land, that Eastern land,
    Alba, with its wonders.
    O that I might not depart from it,
    But that I go with Naoise.

    Beloved is Dunfidgha and Dun Fin;
    Beloved the Dun above them;
    Beloved is Innisdraighende;[18]
    And beloved Dun Suibhne.[19]

    Coillchuan! O Coillchuan!
    Where Ainnle would, alas! resort;
    Too short, I deem, was then my stay
    With Ainnle in Oirir Alban.

    Glenlaidhe![20] O Glenlaidhe!
    I used to sleep by its soothing murmur;
    Fish, and flesh of wild boar and badger,
    Was my repast in Glenlaidhe.

    Glenmasan! O Glenmasan![21]
    High its herbs, fair its boughs.
    Solitary was the place of our repose
    On grassy Invermasan.

    Gleneitche![22] O Gleneitche!
    There was raised my earliest home.
    Beautiful its woods on rising,
    When the sun struck on Gleneitche.

    Glen Urchain![23] O Glen Urchain!
    It was the straight glen of smooth ridges,
    Not more joyful was a man of his age
    Than Naoise in Glen Urchain.

    Glendaruadh![24] O Glendaruadh!
    My love each man of its inheritance.
    Sweet the voice of the cuckoo, on bending bough,
    On the hill above Glendaruadh.

    Beloved is Draighen and its sounding shore;
    Beloved is the water o'er the pure sand.
    O that I might not depart from the east,
    But that I go with my beloved!"

        _Translated by W. F. Skene, LL.D._

Thus they fared across the grey-green sea betwixt Alba and Erin, and
when Ardan and Ainle and Naoise heard the words of the song of
Deirdrê, on their hearts also descended the strange sorrow of an evil
thing from which no courage could save them.

At Ballycastle, opposite Rathlin Island, where a rock on the shore
("Carraig Uisneach") still bears the name of the Sons of Usna, Fergus
and the returned exiles landed. And scarcely were they out of sight of
the shore when a messenger came to Fergus, bidding him to a feast of
ale at the dun of Borrach. Then Fergus, knowing well that in this was
the hand of Conor and that treachery was meant, reddened all over with
anger and with shame. But yet he dared not break his _geasa_, even
although by holding to it the honour he had pledged to the three
brothers for their safe-conduct and that of Deirdrê was dragged
through the mire. He therefore gave them his sons for escort and went
to the feast at the dun of Borrach, full well knowing that Deirdrê
spoke truth when she told him sadly that he had sold his honour. The
gloomy forebodings that had assailed the heart of Deirdrê ere they had
left Loch Etive grew ever the stronger as they went southwards. She
begged Naoise to let them go to some place of safety and there wait
until Fergus had fulfilled his _geasa_ and could rejoin them and go
with them to Emain Macha. But the Sons of Usna, strong in the
knowledge of their own strength, and simply trustful of the pledged
word of Conor and of Fergus, laughed at her fears, and continued on
their way. Dreams of dread portent haunted her sleep, and by daytime
her eyes in her white face looked like violets in the snow. She saw a
cloud of blood always hanging over the beautiful Sons of Usna, and all
of them she saw, and Illann the Fair, with their heads shorn off, gory
and awful. Yet no pleading words could prevail upon Naoise. His fate
drove him on.

"To Emain Macha we must go, my beloved," he said. "To do other than
this would be to show that we have fear, and fear we have none."

Thus at last did they arrive at Emain Macha, and with courteous
welcome Conor sent them word that the house of the heroes of the Red
Branch was to be theirs that night. And although the place the king
had chosen for their lodgment confirmed all the intuitions and
forebodings of Deirdrê, the evening was spent by in good cheer, and
Deirdrê had the joy of a welcome there from her old friend Lavarcam.
For to Lavarcam Conor had said: "I would have thee go to the House of
the Red Branch and bring me back tidings if the beauty of Deirdrê has
waned, or if she is still the most beautiful of all women."

And when Lavarcam saw her whom she had loved as a little child,
playing chess with her husband at the board of ivory and gold, she
knew that love had made the beauty of Deirdrê blossom, and that she
was now more beautiful than the words of any man or woman could tell.
Nor was it possible for her to be a tool for Conor when she looked in
the starry eyes of Deirdrê, and so she poured forth warning of the
treachery of Conor, and the Sons of Usna knew that there was truth in
the dreams of her who was the queen of their hearts. And even as
Lavarcam ceased there came to the eyes of Deirdrê a vision such as
that of Cathbad the Druid on the night of her birth.

    "I see three torches quenched this night," she said.
    "And these three torches are the Three Torches of Valour
    among the Gael, and their names are the names of the
    Sons of Usna. And more bitter still is this sorrow,
    because that the Red Branch shall ultimately perish
    through it, and Uladh itself be overthrown, and blood
    fall this way and that as the whirled rains of
    winter."

        Fiona Macleod.

Then Lavarcam went her way, and returned to the palace at Emain Macha
and told Conor that the cruel winds and snows of Alba had robbed
Deirdrê of all her loveliness, so that she was no more a thing to be
desired. But Naoise had said to Deirdrê when she foretold his doom:
"Better to die for thee and for thy deathless beauty than to have
lived without knowledge of thee and thy love," and it may have been
that some memory of the face of Deirdrê, when she heard these words,
dwelt in the eyes of Lavarcam and put quick suspicion into the evil
heart of the king. For when Lavarcam had gone forth, well pleased that
she had saved her darling, Conor sent a spy--a man whose father and
three brothers had fallen in battle under the sword of Naoise--that he
might see Deirdrê and confirm or contradict the report of Lavarcam.
And when this man reached the house of the Red Branch, he found that
the Sons of Usna had been put on their guard, for all the doors and
windows were barred. Thus he climbed to a narrow upper window and
peered in. There, lying on the couches, the chess-board of ivory and
gold between them, were Naoise and Deirdrê. So beautiful were they,
that they were as the deathless gods, and as they played that last
game of their lives, they spoke together in low voices of love that
sounded like the melody of a harp in the hands of a master player.
Deirdrê was the first to see the peering face with the eyes that
gloated on her loveliness. No word said she, but silently made the
gaze of Naoise follow her own, even as he held a golden chessman in
his hand, pondering a move. Swift as a stone from a sling the chessman
was hurled, and the man fell back to the ground with his eyeball
smashed, and found his way to Emain Macha as best he could, shaking
with agony and snarling with lust for revenge. Vividly he painted for
the king the picture of the most beautiful woman on earth as she
played at the chess-board that he held so dear, and the rage of Conor
that had smouldered ever since that day when he learned that Naoise
had stolen Deirdrê from him, flamed up into madness. With a bellow
like that of a wounded bull, he called upon the Ultonians to come with
him to the House of the Red Branch, to burn it down, and to slay all
those within it with the sword, save only Deirdrê, who was to be saved
for a more cruel fate.

In the House of the Red Branch, Deirdrê and the three brothers and the
two sons of Fergus heard the shouts of the Ultonians and knew that the
storm was about to break. But, calm as rocks against which the angry
waves beat themselves in vain, sat those whose portion at dawn was to
be cruel death. And Naoise and Ainle played chess, with hands that did
not tremble. At the first onslaught, Buinne the Red, son of Fergus,
sallied forth, quenched the flames, and drove back the Ultonians with
great slaughter. But Conor called to him to parley and offered him a
bribe of land, and Buinne, treacherous son of a treacherous father,
went over to the enemy. His brother, Illann the Fair, filled with
shame, did what he could to make amends. He went forth, and many
hundreds of the besieging army fell before him, ere death stayed his
loyal hand. At his death the Ultonians again fired the house, and
first Ardan and then Ainle left their chess for a fiercer game, and
glutted their sword blades with the blood of their enemies. Last came
the turn of Naoise. He kissed Deirdrê, and drank a drink, and went out
against the men of Conor, and where his brothers had slain hundreds,
a thousand fell before his sword.

Then fear came into the heart of Conor, for he foresaw that against
the Sons of Usna no man could prevail, save by magic. Thus he sent for
Cathbad the Druid, who was even then very near death, and the old man
was carried on a litter to the House of the Red Branch, from which the
flames were leaping, and before which the dead lay in heaps.

And Conor besought him to help him to subdue the Sons of Usna ere they
should have slain every Ultonian in the land. So by his magic Cathbad
raised a hedge of spears round the house. But Naoise, Ardan, and
Ainle, with Deirdrê in their centre, sheltered by their shields, burst
suddenly forth from the blazing house, and cut a way for themselves
through the hedge as though they sheared green wheat. And, laughing
aloud, they took a terrible toll of lives from the Ultonians who would
have withstood them. Then again the Druid put forth his power, and a
noise like the noise of many waters was in the ears of all who were
there. So suddenly the magic flood arose that there was no chance of
escape for the Sons of Usna. Higher it mounted, ever higher, and
Naoise held Deirdrê on his shoulder, and smiled up in her eyes as the
water rose past his middle. Then suddenly as it had come, the flood
abated, and all was well with the Ultonians who had sheltered on a
rising ground. But the Sons of Usna found themselves entrapped in a
morass where the water had been. Conor, seeing them in his hands at
last, bade some of his warriors go and take them. But for shame no
Ultonian would go, and it was a man from Norway who walked along a dry
spit of land to where they stood, sunk deep in the green bog. "Slay me
first!" called Ardan as he drew near, sword in hand. "I am the
youngest, and, who knows, my death may change the tides of fate!"

And Ainle also craved that death might be dealt to him the first. But
Naoise held out his own sword, "The Retaliator," to the executioner.

"Mannanan, the son of Lîr, gave me my good sword," he said. "With it
strike my dear brothers and me one blow only as we stand here like
three trees planted in the soil. Then shall none of us know the grief
and shame of seeing the other beheaded." And because it was hard for
any man to disobey the command of Naoise, a king of men, the Norseman
reached out his hand for the sword. But Deirdrê sprang from the
shoulder of Naoise and would have killed the man ere he struck.
Roughly he threw her aside, and with one blow he shore off the heads
of the three greatest heroes of Alba.

For a little while there was a great stillness there, like the silence
before the coming of a storm. And then all who had beheld the end of
the fair and noble Sons of Usna broke into great lamentation. Only
Conor stood silent, gazing at the havoc he had wrought. To Cuchulainn,
the mighty champion, a good man and a true, Deirdrê fled, and begged
him to protect her for the little span of life that she knew yet
remained to her. And with him she went to where the head of Naoise
lay, and tenderly she cleansed it from blood and from the stains of
strife and stress, and smoothed the hair that was black as a raven's
wing, and kissed the cold lips again and again. And as she held it
against her white breast, as a mother holds a little child, she
chanted for Naoise, her heart, and for his brothers, a lament that
still lives in the language of the Gael.

    "Is it honour that ye love, brave and chivalrous Ultonians?
    Or is the word of a base king better than noble truth?
    Of a surety ye must be glad, who have basely slain honour
    In slaying the three noblest and best of your brotherhood.

               *   *   *   *   *

    Let now my beauty that set all this warring aflame,
    Let now my beauty be quenched as a torch that is spent--
    For here shall I quench it, here, where my loved one lies,
    A torch shall it be for him still through the darkness of death."

        Fiona Macleod's Translation.

Then, at the bidding of Cuchulainn, the Ultonian, three graves were
dug for the brothers, but the grave of Naoise was made wider than the
others, and when he was placed in it, standing upright, with his head
placed on his shoulders, Deirdrê stood by him and held him in her
white arms, and murmured to him of the love that was theirs and of
which not Death itself could rob them. And even as she spoke to him,
merciful Death took her, and together they were buried. At that same
hour a terrible cry was heard: "_The Red Branch perisheth! Uladh
passeth! Uladh passeth!_" and when he had so spoken, the soul of
Cathbad the Druid passed away.

To the land of the Ultonians there came on the morrow a mighty host,
and the Red Branch was wiped out for ever. Emain Macha was cast into
ruins, and Conor died in a madness of sorrow.

And still, in that land of Erin where she died, still in the lonely
cleuchs and glens, and up the mist-hung mountain sides of Loch Etive,
where she knew her truest happiness, we can sometimes almost hear the
wind sighing the lament: "Deirdrê the beautiful is dead ... is dead!"

    "I hear a voice crying, crying, crying: is it the wind
    I hear, crying its old weary cry time out of mind?

    _The grey wind weeps, the grey wind weeps, the grey wind weeps:_
    _Dust on her breast, dust on her eyes, the grey wind weeps._"

        Fiona Macleod.

