ECHO AND NARCISSUS


In the solitudes of the hills we find her, and yet we may come on her
unawares in the din of a noisy city. She will answer us where the
waves are lashing themselves against the rugged cliffs of our own
British coast, or we may find her where the great yellow pillars of
fallen temples lie hot in the sun close to the vivid blue water of the
African sea. At nightfall, on the lonely northern moors, she mimics
the cry of a wailing bird that calls for its mate, but it is she who
prolongs the roll of the great organ in a vast cathedral, she who
repeats the rattle and crack and boom of the guns, no matter in what
land the war may be raging. In the desolate Australian bush she makes
the crash of the falling limb of a dead gum tree go on and on, and
tortures the human being who is lost, hopelessly lost, and facing a
cruel death, by repeating his despairing calls for help. Through the
night, in old country-houses, she sports at will and gives new life to
sad old tales of the restless dead who restlessly walk. But she echoes
the children's voices as they play by the seashore or pick primroses
in the woods in spring, and when they greet her with laughter, she
laughs in merry response. They may fear her when the sun has gone
down, and when they are left all alone they begin to dread her
mockery. Yet the nymph who sought for love and failed to gain what
she sought must surely find some comfort on those bright days of
summer and of spring when she gives the little children happiness and
they give her their love.

When all the world was young, and nymphs and fauns and dryads dwelt in
the forests, there was no nymph more lovely and more gay than she
whose name was Echo. Diana would smile on her for her fleetness of
foot when she followed her in the chase, and those whom she met in the
leafy pathways of the dim, green woods, would pass on smiling at the
remembrance of her merry chatter and her tricksy humour.

It was an evil day for Echo when she crossed the path of Hera, queen
of the gods. The jealous goddess sought her errant husband, who was
amusing himself with some nymphs, and Echo, full of mischievous glee,
kept her in talk until the nymphs had fled to safety. Hera was furious
indeed when she found out that a frolicsome nymph had dared to play on
her such a trick, and ruthlessly she spoke fair Echo's doom.

"Henceforth," she said, "the tongue with which thou hast cheated me
shall be in bonds. No longer wilt thou have the power to speak in
greeting. To the tongues of others shall thy tongue be slave, and from
this day until time shall cease thou shalt speak only to repeat the
last words that have fallen on thine ears."

A maimed nymph indeed was Echo then, yet whole in all that matters
most, in that her merry heart was still her own. But only for a little
while did this endure.

Narcissus, the beautiful son of a nymph and a river god, was hunting
in a lonely forest one day when Echo saw him pass. To her he seemed
more fair than god or man, and once she had seen him she knew that she
must gain his love or die. From that day on, she haunted him like his
shadow, gliding from tree to tree, nestling down amongst thick fern
and undergrowth, motionless as one who stalks a wild thing, watching
him afar off while he rested, gladdening her eyes with his beauty. So
did she feed her hungering heart, and sought to find contentment by
looking on his face each day.

To her at length came a perfect moment when Narcissus was separated
from his companions in the chase and, stopping suddenly where the
evening sun chequered the pathway of the forest with black and gold,
heard the nymph's soft footfall on the rustling leaves.

"Who's here?" he called.

"_Here!_" answered Echo.

Narcissus, peering amongst the trees' long shadows and seeing no one,
called "Come!"

And "_Come!_" called the glad voice of Echo, while the nymph, with
fast-beating heart, felt that her day of happiness had come indeed.

"Why do you shun me?" then called Narcissus.

"_Why do you shun me?_" Echo repeated.

"Let us join one another," said the lad, and the simple words seemed
turned into song when Echo said them over.

"_Let us join one another!_" she said, and not Eos herself, as with
rosy fingers she turns aside the dark clouds of night, could be fairer
than was the nymph as she pushed aside the leaves of the trackless
wood, and ran forward with white arms outstretched to him who was lord
of her life.

[Illustration: SHE HAUNTED HIM LIKE HIS SHADOW]

With cold eyes and colder heart the one she loved beheld her.

"Away!" he cried, shrinking back as if from something that he hated.
"_Away!_ I would rather die than that you should have me!"

"_Have me!_" cried Echo pitifully, but she pled in vain. Narcissus had
no love to give her, and his scorn filled her with shame. Thenceforth
in the forest revels she never more was seen, and the nymphs danced
gaily as ever, with never a care for her who had faded and gone away
as completely as though she were a blossom in the passing of spring.
In the solitude of mountain cliffs and caves and rocky places, and in
the loneliest depths of the forest, Echo hid her grief, and when the
winds blew through the dark branches of the trees at night, moaning
and sighing, they could hear far below them the voice of Echo
repeating their lamentations. For her, long nights followed hopeless
days, and nights and days only told her that her love was all in vain.
Then came a night when the winds no longer saw the figure of the
nymph, white and frail as a broken flower, crouching close to the
rocks they passed over. Grief had slain the body of Echo. Only her
voice was left to repeat their mocking laughter, their wistful
sighs--only her voice that lives on still though all the old gods are
gone, and but few there are who know her story.

Heartwhole and happy, Narcissus, slayer of happiness, went on his
way, and other nymphs besides fair Echo suffered from loving him in
vain. One nymph, less gentle than Echo, poured the tale of her love
that was scorned into the sympathetic ears of the goddess of Love, and
implored her to punish Narcissus.

Hot and tired from the chase, Narcissus sought one day a lonely pool
in the woods, there to rest and to quench his thirst.

    "In some delicious ramble, he had found
    A little space, with boughs all woven round;
    And in the midst of all, a clearer pool
    Than e'er reflected in its pleasant cool
    The blue sky here, and there, serenely peeping
    Through tendril wreaths fantastically creeping."

As he stooped down to drink, a face looked at his through the crystal
clear water, and a pair of beautiful eyes met his own. His surprise
and joy at the sight of what he felt sure must be the most beautiful
creature on earth, was evidently shared by the nymph of the pool, who
gazed fearlessly up at him.

Round her head she had a nimbus of curls than which that of
Adonis--nay, of the sun-god himself, was not more perfect, while her
eyes were like the brown pools of water in a rippling mountain stream,
flecked with sunshine, yet with depths untold. When Narcissus smiled
at her in rapture, her red lips also parted in a smile. He stretched
out his arms towards her, and her arms were stretched to him. Almost
trembling in his delight, he slowly stooped to kiss her. Nearer she
drew to him, nearer still, but when his mouth would have given itself
to that other mouth that was formed like the bow of Eros--a thing to
slay hearts--only the chilly water of the pool touched his lips, and
the thing of his delight vanished away. In passionate disappointment
Narcissus waited for her to return, and as soon as the water of the
pool grew still, once more he saw her exquisite face gazing wistfully
up into his. Passionately he pled with the beautiful creature--spoke
of his love--besought her to have pity on him, but although the face
in the pool reflected his every look of adoration and of longing, time
and again he vainly tried to clasp in his arms what was but the
mirrored likeness of himself.

In full measure had the avenging goddess meted out to Narcissus the
restless longing of unsatisfied love. By day and by night he haunted
the forest pool, and ere long the face that looked back at his was
pale as a lily in the dawn. When the moonbeams came straying down
through the branches and all the night was still, they found him
kneeling by the pool, and the white face that the water mirrored had
the eyes of one of the things of the woods to which a huntsman has
given a mortal wound. Mortally wounded he truly was, slain, like many
another since his day, by a hopeless love for what was in truth but an
image, and that an image of his own creation. Even when his shade
passed across the dark Stygian river, it stooped over the side of the
boat that it might try to catch a glimpse of the beloved one in the
inky waters.

Echo and the other nymphs were avenged, yet when they looked on the
beautiful dead Narcissus, they were filled with sorrow, and when they
filled the air with their lamentations, most piteously did the voice
of Echo repeat each mournful cry. Even the gods were pitiful, and when
the nymphs would have burned the body on a funeral pyre which their
own fair hands had built for him, they sought it in vain. For the
Olympians had turned Narcissus into a white flower, the flower that
still bears his name and keeps his memory sweet.

                  "A lonely flower he spied,
    A meek and forlorn flower, with naught of pride,
    Drooping its beauty o'er the watery clearness,
    To woo its own sad image into nearness;
    Deaf to light Zephyrus it would not move,
    But still would seem to droop, to pine, to love."

        Keats.