LATONA AND THE RUSTICS


Through the tropic nights their sonorous, bell-like booming can be
heard coming up from the marshes, and when they are unseen, the song
of the bull-frogs would suggest creatures full of solemn dignity. The
croak of their lesser brethren is less impressive, yet there is no
escape from it on those evenings when the dragon-flies' iridescent
wings are folded in sleep, and the birds in the branches are still,
when the lilies on the pond have closed their golden hearts, and even
the late-feeding trout have ceased to plop and to make eddies in the
quiet water. "Krroak! krroak! krroak!" they go--"krroak! krroak!
krroak!"

It is unceasing, unending. It goes on like the whirr of the wheels of
a great clock that can never run down--a melancholy complaint against
the hardships of destiny--a raucous protest against things as they
are.

This is the story of the frogs that have helped to point the gibes of
Aristophanes, the morals of Æsop, and which have always been, more or
less, regarded as the low comedians of the animal world.

Latona, or Leto, was the goddess of dark nights, and upon her the
mighty Zeus bestowed the doubtful favour of his errant love. Great was
the wrath of Hera, his queen, when she found that she was no longer
the dearest wife of her omnipotent lord, and with furious upbraidings
she banished her rival to earth. And when Latona had reached the place
of her exile she found that the vengeful goddess had sworn that she
would place her everlasting ban upon anyone, mortal or immortal, who
dared to show any kindness or pity to her whose only fault had been
that Zeus loved her. From place to place she wandered, an outcast even
among men, until, at length, she came to Lycia.

One evening, as the darkness of which she was goddess had just begun
to fall, she reached a green and pleasant valley. The soft, cool grass
was a delight to her tired feet, and when she saw the silvery gleam of
water she rejoiced, for her throat was parched and her lips dry and
she was very weary. By the side of this still pond, where the lilies
floated, there grew lithe grey willows and fresh green osiers, and
these were being cut by a crowd of chattering rustics.

Humbly, for many a rude word and harsh rebuff had the dictum of Hera
brought her during her wanderings, Latona went to the edge of the
pond, and, kneeling down, was most thankfully about to drink, when the
peasants espied her. Roughly and rudely they told her to begone, nor
dare to drink unbidden of the clear water beside which their willows
grew. Very pitifully Latona looked up in their churlish faces, and her
eyes were as the eyes of a doe that the hunters have pressed very
hard.

"Surely, good people," she said, and her voice was sad and low, "water
is free to all. Very far have I travelled, and I am aweary almost to
death. Only grant that I dip my lips in the water for one deep
draught. Of thy pity grant me this boon, for I perish of thirst."

Harsh and coarse were the mocking voices that made answer. Coarser
still were the jests that they made. Then one, bolder than his
fellows, spurned her kneeling figure with his foot, while another
brushed before her and stepping into the pond, defiled its clarity by
churning up the mud that lay below with his great splay feet.

Loudly the peasants laughed at this merry jest, and they quickly
followed his lead, as brainless sheep will follow the one that
scrambles through a gap. Soon they were all joyously stamping and
dancing in what had so lately been a pellucid pool. The water-lilies
and blue forget-me-nots were trodden down, the fish that had their
homes under the mossy stones in terror fled away. Only the mud came
up, filthy, defiling, and the rustics laughed in loud and foolish
laughter to see the havoc they had wrought.

The goddess Latona rose from her knees. No longer did she seem a mere
woman, very weary, hungry and athirst, travelled over far. In their
surprised eyes she grew to a stature that was as that of the deathless
gods. And her eyes were dark as an angry sea at even.

"Shameless ones!" she said, in a voice as the voice of a storm that
sweeps destroyingly over forest and mountain. "Ah! shameless ones! Is
it thus that thou wouldst defy one who has dwelt on Olympus? Behold
from henceforth shalt thou have thy dwelling in the mud of the
green-scummed pools, thy homes in the water that thy flat feet have
defiled."

As she spoke, a change, strange and terrible, passed over the forms of
the trampling peasants. Their stature shrank. They grew squat and fat.
Their hands and feet were webbed, and their grinning mouths became
great, sad, gaping openings by which to swallow worms and flies. Green
and yellow and brown were their skins, and when they would fain have
cried aloud for mercy, from their throats there would come only the
"_Krroak! krroak! krroak!_" that we know so well.

And when, that night, the goddess of darkness was wrapped in peace in
the black, silver star bespangled robe that none could take from her,
there arose from the pond over which the grey willows hung, weeping,
the clamour of a great lamentation. Yet no piteous words were there,
only the incessant, harsh complaint of the frogs that we hear in the
marshes.

From that time the world went well with Latona. Down to the seashore
she came, and when she held out her arms in longing appeal to the
Ægean islands that lay like purple flowers strewn, far apart, on a
soft carpet of limpid blue, Zeus heard her prayer. He asked Poseidon
to send a dolphin to carry the woman he loved to the floating island
of Delos, and when she had been borne there in safety, he chained the
island with chains of adamant to the golden-sanded floor of the sea.

And on this sanctuary there were born to Latona twin children,
thereafter to be amongst the most famed of the deathless gods--the
god and goddess, Apollo and Diana.

    "... Those hinds that were transformed to frogs
    Railed at Latona's twin-born progeny,
    Which after held the sun and moon in fee."

        Milton.

Yet are there times, as we look at the squat, bronze bodies of the
frogs--green-bronze, dark brown spotted, and all flecked with gold,
the turned-down corners of their wistful mouths, their very exquisite
black velvety eyes with golden rims--when the piteous croaks that come
forth from their throats of pale daffodil colour do indeed awake a
sympathy with their appeal against the inexorable decrees of destiny.

"We did not know! We did not understand! Pity us! Ah, pity us!
_Krroak! krroak! krroak!_"