CLYTIE


The sunbeams are basking on the high walls of the old garden--smiling
on the fruit that grows red and golden in their warmth. The bees are
humming round the bed of purple heliotrope, and drowsily murmuring in
the shelter of the soft petals of the blush roses whose sweetness
brings back the fragrance of days that are gone. On the old grey
sundial the white-winged pigeons sleepily croon as they preen their
snowy plumage, and the Madonna lilies hang their heads like a
procession of white-robed nuns who dare not look up from telling their
beads until the triumphal procession of an all-conquering warrior has
gone by. What can they think of that long line of tall yellow flowers
by the garden wall, who turn their faces sunwards with an arrogant
assurance, and give stare for stare to golden-haired Apollo as he
drives his blazing car triumphant through the high heavens?

"Sunflowers" is the name by which we know those flamboyant blossoms
which somehow fail so wholly to suggest the story of Clytie, the nymph
whose destruction came from a faithful, unrequited love. She was a
water-nymph, a timid, gentle being who frequented lonely streams, and
bathed where the blue dragon-flies dart across the white water-lilies
in pellucid lakes. In the shade of the tall poplar trees and the
silvery willows she took her midday rest, and feared the hours when
the flowers drooped their heads and the rippling water lost its
coolness before the fierce glare of the sun.

But there came a day when, into the dark pool by which she sat, Apollo
the Conqueror looked down and mirrored his face. And nevermore did she
hide from the golden-haired god who, from the moment when she had seen
in the water the picture of his radiant beauty, became the lord and
master of her heart and soul. All night she awaited his coming, and
the Dawn saw her looking eastward for the first golden gleams from the
wheels of his chariot. All day she followed him with her longing gaze,
nor did she ever cease to feast her eyes upon his beauty until the
last reflection of his radiance had faded from the western sky.

Such devotion might have touched the heart of the sun-god, but he had
no wish to own a love for which he had not sought. The nymph's
adoration irked him, nor did pity come as Love's pale substitute when
he marked how, day by day, her face grew whiter and more white, and
her lovely form wasted away. For nine days, without food or drink, she
kept her shamed vigil. Only one word of love did she crave. Unexacting
in the humility of her devotion, she would gratefully have nourished
her hungry heart upon one kindly glance. But Apollo, full of scorn and
anger, lashed up his fiery steeds as he each day drove past her, nor
deigned for her a glance more gentle than that which he threw on the
satyrs as they hid in the dense green foliage of the shadowy woods.

Half-mocking, Diana said, "In truth the fair nymph who throws her
heart's treasures at the feet of my golden-locked brother that he may
trample on them, is coming to look like a faded flower!" And, as she
spoke, the hearts of the other immortal dwellers in Olympus were
stirred with pity.

"A flower she shall be!" they said, "and for all time shall she live,
in life that is renewed each year when the earth stirs with the
quickening of spring. The long summer days shall she spend forever in
fearless worship of the god of her love!"

And, as they willed, the nymph passed out of her human form, and took
the form of a flower, and evermore--the emblem of constancy--does she
gaze with fearless ardour on the face of her love.

    "The heart that has truly loved never forgets,
      But as truly loves on to the close;
    As the sunflower turns on her god when he sets
      The same look that she turned when he rose."

Some there are who say that not into the bold-faced sunflower did her
metamorphosis take place, but into that purple heliotrope that gives
an exquisite offering of fragrance to the sun-god when his warm rays
touch it. And in the old walled garden, while the bees drowsily hum,
and the white pigeons croon, and the dashing sunflower gives Apollo
gaze for gaze, and the scent of the mignonette mingles with that of
clove pinks and blush roses, the fragrance of the heliotrope is, above
all, worthy incense to be offered upon his altar by the devout lover
of a god.