THE CALYDONIAN HUNT


OEneus and Althæa were king and queen of Calydon, and to them was
born a son who was his mother's joy and yet her bitterest sorrow.
Meleager was his name, and ere his birth his mother dreamed a dream
that the child that she bore was a burning firebrand. But when the
baby came he was a royal child indeed, a little fearless king from the
first moment that his eyes, like unseeing violets, gazed steadily up
at his mother. To the chamber where he lay by his mother's side came
the three Fates, spinning, ceaselessly spinning.

"He shall be strong," said one, as she span her thread. "He shall be
fortunate and brave," said the second. But the third laid a billet of
wood on the flames, and while her withered fingers held the fatal
threads, she looked with old, old, sad eyes at the new-born child.

"To thee, O New-Born," she said, "and to this wood that burns, do we
give the same span of days to live."

From her bed sprang Althæa, and, heedless of the flames, she seized
the burning wood, trod on it with her fair white feet, and poured on
it water that swiftly quenched its red glow. "Thou shalt live forever,
O Beloved," she said, "for never again shall fire char the brand that
I have plucked from the burning."

And the baby laughed.

    "Those grey women with bound hair
    Who fright the gods frighted not him; he laughed
    Seeing them, and pushed out hands to feel and haul
    Distaff and thread."

The years sped on, and from fearless and beautiful babyhood, Meleager
grew into gallant boyhood, and then into magnificent youth. When Jason
and his heroes sailed away into a distant land to win the Golden
Fleece, Meleager was one of the noble band. From all men living he won
great praise for his brave deeds, and when the tribes of the north and
west made war upon Ætolia, he fought against their army and scattered
it as a wind in autumn drives the fallen leaves before it.

But his victory brought evil upon him. When his father OEneus, at
the end of a fruitful year, offered sacrifices to the gods, he omitted
to honour the goddess Diana by sacrificing to her, and to punish his
neglect, she had sent this destroying army. When Meleager was victor,
her wrath against his father grew yet more hot, and she sent a wild
boar, large as the bulls of Epirus, and fierce and savage to kill and
to devour, that it might ravage and lay waste the land of Calydon. The
fields of corn were trampled under foot, the vineyards laid waste, and
the olive groves wrecked as by a winter hurricane. Flocks and herds
were slaughtered by it, or driven hither and thither in wild panic,
working havoc as they fled. Many went out to slay it, but went only to
find a hideous death. Then did Meleager resolve that he would rid the
land of this monster, and called on all his friends, the heroes of
Greece, to come to his aid. Theseus and his friend Pirithous came;
Jason; Peleus, afterwards father of Achilles; Telamon, the father of
Ajax; Nestor, then but a youth; Castor and Pollux, and Toxeus and
Plexippus, the brothers of Althæa, the fair queen-mother. But there
came none more fearless nor more ready to fight the monster boar of
Calydon than Atalanta, the daughter of the king of Arcadia. When
Atalanta was born, her father heard of her birth with anger. He
desired no daughter, but only sturdy sons who might fight for him, and
in the furious rage of bitter disappointment he had the baby princess
left on the Parthenian Hill that she might perish there. A she-bear
heard the baby's piteous cries, and carried it off to its lair, where
she suckled it along with her young, and there the little Atalanta
tumbled about and played with her furry companions and grew strong and
vigorous as any other wild young creature of the forest.

Some hunters came one day to raid the den and kill the foster-mother,
and found, amazed, a fearless, white-skinned thing with rosy cheeks
and brave eyes, who fought for her life and bit them as did her fierce
foster-brothers, and then cried human tears of rage and sorrow when
she saw the bear who had been her mother lying bloody and dead. Under
the care of the hunters Atalanta grew into a maiden, with all the
beauty of a maid and all the strength and the courage of a man. She
ran as swiftly as Zephyrus runs when he rushes up from the west and
drives the white clouds before him like a flock of timid fawns that a
hound is pursuing. The shafts that her strong arm sped from her bow
smote straight to the heart of the beast that she chased, and almost
as swift as her arrow was she there to drive her spear into her
quarry. When at length her father the king learned that the beautiful
huntress, of whom all men spoke as of one only a little lower than
Diana, was none other than his daughter, he was not slow to own her as
his child. So proud was he of her beauty and grace, and of her
marvellous swiftness of foot and skill in the chase, that he would
fain have married her to one of the great ones of Greece, but Atalanta
had consulted an oracle. "Marry not," said the oracle. "To thee
marriage must bring woe."

So, with untouched heart, and with the daring and the courage of a
young lad, Atalanta came along with the heroes to the Calydonian Hunt.
She was so radiantly lovely, so young, so strong, so courageous, that
straightway Meleager loved her, and all the heroes gazed at her with
eyes that adored her beauty. And Diana, looking down at her, also
loved the maiden whom from childhood she had held in her protection--a
gallant, fearless virgin dear to her heart.

The grey mist rose from the marshes as the hunt began, and the hunters
of the boar had gone but a little way when they came upon traces of
the hated boar. Disembowelled beasts marked its track. Here, in a
flowery meadow, had it wallowed. There, in rich wheat land, had it
routed, and the marks of its bestial tusks were on the gashed grey
trunks of the trees that had once lived in the peace of a fruitful
olive grove.

In a marsh they found their enemy, and all the reeds quivered as it
heaved its vast bulk and hove aside the weed in which it had wallowed,
and rooted with its tusks amongst the wounded water-lilies before it
leapt with a snort to meet and to slay the men who had come against
it. A filthy thing it was, as its pink snout rose above the green ooze
of the marshes, and it looked up lustingly, defying the purity of the
blue skies of heaven, to bring to those who came against it a cruel,
shameful death.

Upon it, first of all, Jason cast his spear. But the sharp point only
touched it, and unwounded, the boar rushed on, its gross, bristly head
down, to disembowel, if it could, the gallant Nestor. In the branches
of a tree Nestor found safety, and Telamon rushed on to destroy the
filthy thing that would have made carrion of the sons of the gods. A
straggling cypress root caught his fleeting foot and laid him prone, a
helpless prey for the rooting brute. His hounds fell before it, but
ere it could reach him, Atalanta, full of vengeful rage--the pure
angered against the filthy and cruel--let draw her bow, with a prayer
to Diana to guide her shaft aright. Into the boar's smoking flank sped
the arrow.

                      "The sudden string
    Rang, and sprang inward, and the waterish air
    Hissed, and the moist plumes of the songless reeds
    Moved as a wave which the wind moves no more.
    But the boar heaved half out of ooze and slime,
    His tense flank trembling round the barbed wound,
    Hateful; and fiery with invasive eyes
    And bristling with intolerable hair
    Plunged, and the hounds clung, and green flowers and white
    Reddened and broke all round them where they came.
    And charging with sheer tusk he drove, and smote
    Hyleus; and sharp death caught his sudden soul,
    And violent sleep shed night upon his eyes."

        Swinburne.

More than ever terrible was the monster now that it was wounded. One
after the other the hunters fell before its mad rage, and were sent to
the shades by a bloody and merciless death.

Before its furious charge even the heart of a hero might have been
stricken. Yet Meleager, like a mighty oak of the forest that will not
sway even a little before the rush of a storm, stood full in its way
and met its onslaught.

    "Aimed on the left side his well-handled spear
    Grasped where the ash was knottiest hewn, and smote,
    And with no missile wound, the monstrous boar
    Right in the hairiest hollow of his hide
    Under the last rib, sheer through bulk and bone,
    Deep in; and deeply smitten, and to death,
    The heavy horror with his hanging shafts,
    Leapt, and fell furiously, and from raging lips
    Foamed out the latest wrath of all his life."

Great was the shout that rose from those who still lived when that
grim hunt thus came to an end. And when, with his keen blade, Meleager
struck off the head, even as the quivering throat drew its last
agonised breath, louder still shouted the men of Greece. But not for
himself did Meleager despoil the body of his foe. He laid the ugly
thing at the feet of Atalanta.

"This is thy spoil, not mine," he said. "The wounding shaft was sped
by thee. To thee belongs the praise."

And Atalanta blushed rosily, and laughed low and gladly, not only
because Diana had heard her prayer and helped her slay the beast, but
for happiness that Meleager was so noble in his giving.

At that the brows of the heroes grew dark, and angrily one cried:

                                "Lo, now,
    Shall not the Arcadian shoot out lips at us,
    Saying all we were despoiled by this one girl."

Like a spark that kindles the dry grass, their kindling anger spread,
and they rushed against Atalanta, seized the trophy she had been
given, and smote her as though she were but a shameless wanton and not
the noble daughter of a king.

And because the heart of Meleager was given very wholly to the fair
huntress, and because those whom he deemed his friends had not only
dishonoured her, but had done him a very grievous wrong, a great rage
seized him. Right and left he smote, and they who had been most bitter
in their jealousy of Atalanta, the two brothers of his own mother,
were laid low in death.

Tidings of the slaying of the boar had been brought to Althæa by swift
messengers, and she was on her way to the temples bearing gifts to the
gods for the victory of her son, when she beheld the slow-footed
procession of those who bore the bodies of the dead. And when she saw
the still faces of her two dear brothers, quickly was her joy turned
into mourning. Terrible was her grief and anger when she learned by
whose hand they were slain, and her mother's love and pride dried up
in her heart like the clear water of a fountain before the scorching
of a devouring fire. No sacrifices to the gods would she offer, but
her dead brothers should have the greatest sacrifice that mother could
make to atone for the guilt of her son. Back to the palace she went,
and from its safe hiding-place drew out the brand that she had rescued
from the flames when Meleager the hero was but a babe that made his
mother's heart sing for joy. She commanded a fire to be prepared, and
four times, as its flames blazed aloft, she tried to lay the brand
upon the pile. Yet four times she drew back, and then at last she
threw into the reddest of the ashes the charred brand that for a
little she held so close to her breast that it seemed as though she
fondled her child.

A wreath of leaves as sign of victory was being placed on Atalanta's
beautiful head by the adoring hands of Meleager when his mother gave
him his doom. Through his body there rushed a pang of mortal agony.
His blood turned to fire, and the hand of Death that smote him was as
a hand of molten lead. In torture his gallant spirit passed away,
uncomplaining, loving through his pain the maid for whose dear sake he
had brought woe upon himself. As the last white ashes in the fire
crumbled and fell away into nothingness, the soul of Meleager
departed. Swiftly through the dark valley his mother's shade followed
him, for she fell upon a sword and so perished. And Diana, looking
down on the grief-stricken sisters of Meleager and on the bitter
sorrow of his father, had compassion on them and turned them into
birds.

So ended the Calydonian Hunt, and Atalanta returned to Arcadia, heavy
at heart for the evil she had wrought unwittingly. And still the Three
Fates span on, and the winds caught up the cold wood ashes and blew
them across the ravaged land that Meleager had saved and that quickly
grew fertile again.