CHAPTER I.

     The Bull of Innocent VIII.--A new Incentive to the vigorous
     Prosecution of Witchcraft--The 'Malleus Maleficarum'--Its
     Criminal Code--Numerous Executions at the Commencement of
     the Sixteenth Century--Examination of Christian
     Demonology--Various Opinions of the Nature of
     Demons--General Belief in the Intercourse of Demons and
     other non-human Beings with Mankind.


Perhaps the most memorable epoch in the annals of witchcraft is
the date of the promulgation of the bull of Pope Innocent VIII.,
when its prosecution was formally sanctioned, enforced, and
developed in the most explicit manner by the highest authority in
the Church. It was in the year 1484 that Innocent VIII. issued
his famous bull directed especially against the crime in Germany,
whose inquisitors were empowered to seek out and burn the
malefactors _pro strigiatûs hæresi_. The bull was as follows:
'Innocent, Bishop, servant of the servants of God, in order to
the future memorial of the matter.... In truth it has come to our
ears, not without immense trouble and grief to ourselves, that
in some parts of Higher Germany ... very many persons of both
sexes, deviating from the Catholic faith, abuse themselves with
the demons, Incubus and Succubus; and by incantations, charms,
conjurations, and other wicked _superstitions_, by criminal acts
and offences have caused the offspring of women and of the lower
animals, the fruits of the earth, the grape, and the products of
various plants, men, women, and other animals of different kinds,
vineyards, meadows, pasture land, corn, and other vegetables of
the earth, to perish, be oppressed, and utterly destroyed; that
they torture men and women with cruel pains and torments,
internal as well as external; that they hinder the proper
intercourse of the sexes, and the propagation of the human
species. Moreover, they are in the habit of denying the very
faith itself. We therefore, willing to provide by opportune
remedies according as it falls to us by our office, by our
apostolical authority, by the tenor of these presents do appoint
and decree that they be convicted, imprisoned, punished, and
mulcted according to their offences.... By the apostolic rescript
given at Rome.'

This, in brief, is an outline of the proclamation of Innocent
VIII., the principles of which were developed in the more
voluminous work of the 'Malleus Maleficarum,'[73] or Hammer of
Witches, five years later. In the interval, the effect of so
forcible an appeal from the Head of the Church was such as might
be expected. Cumanus, one of the inquisitors in 1485, burned
forty-one witches, first shaving them to search for 'marks.'
Alciatus, a lawyer, tells us that another ecclesiastical officer
burned one hundred witches in Piedmont, and was prevented in his
plan of daily _autos-da-fé_ only by a general uprising of the
people, who at length drove him out of the country, when the
archbishop succeeded to the vacant office. In several provinces,
even the servile credulity of the populace could not tolerate the
excesses of the judges; and the inhabitants rose _en masse_
against their inquisitorial oppressors, dreading the entire
depopulation of their neighbourhood. As a sort of apology for the
bull of 1484 was published the 'Malleus'--a significantly
expressive title.[74] The authors appointed by the pope were
Jacob Sprenger, of the Order of Preachers, and Professor of
Theology in Cologne; John Gremper, priest, Master in Arts; and
Henry Institor. The work is divisible, according to the title,
into three parts--Things that pertain to Witchcraft; The Effects
of Witchcraft; and The Remedies for Witchcraft.

  [73] Ennemoser (_History of Magic_), a modern and milder
  Protestant, excepts to the general denunciations of Pope
  Innocent ('who assumed this name, undoubtedly, because he
  wished it to indicate what he really desired to be') by
  Protestant writers who have used such terms as 'a scandalous
  hypocrite,' 'a cursed war-song of hell,' 'hangmen's slaves,'
  'rabid jailers,' 'bloodthirsty monsters,' &c.; and thinks
  that 'the accusation which was made against Innocent could
  only have been justly founded if the pope had not
  participated in the general belief, if he had been wiser
  than his time, and really seen that the heretics were no
  allies of the devil, and that the witches were no heretics.'

  [74] The complete title is 'MALLEUS MALEFICARUM in tres
  partes divisus, in quibus I. Concurrentia ad maleficia; II.
  Maleficiorum effectus; III. Remedia adversus maleficia. Et
  modus denique procedendi ac puniendi maleficas abunde
  continetur, præcipue autem omnibus inquisitoribus et divini
  verbi concionatoribus utilis et necessarius.' The original
  edition of 1489 is the one quoted by Hauber, _Bibliotheca
  Mag._, and referred to by Ennemoser, _History of Magic_.

In this apology the editors are careful to affirm that they
_collected_, rather than _furnished_, their materials originally,
and give as their venerable authorities the names of Dionysius
the Areopagite, Chrysostom, Hilary, Augustin, Gregory I.,
Remigius, Thomas Aquinas, and others. The writers exult in the
consciousness of security, in spite of the attempts of the
demons, day and night, to deter them from completing their
meritorious labours. Stratagems of every sort are employed in
vain. In their judgment the worst species of human wickedness
sink into nothing, compared with apostasy from the Church and, by
consequence, alliance with hell. A genuine or pretended dread of
sorcery, and an affected contempt for the female sex, with an
extremely low estimate of its virtues (adopting the language of
the Fathers), characterises the opinions of the compilers.

Ennemoser has made an abstract from the 'Demonomagie' of Horst
(founded on Hauber's original work), of the 'Hexenhammer,' under
its three principal divisions. The third part, which contains the
Criminal Code, and consists of thirty-five questions, is the most
important section. It is difficult to decide which is the more
astonishing, the perfect folly or the perfect iniquity of the
Code: it is easier to understand how so many thousands of victims
were helplessly sacrificed. The arrest might take place on the
simple rumour of a witch being found somewhere, without any
previous denunciation. The most abandoned and the most infamous
persons may be witnesses: no criminal is too bad. Even a witch or
heretic (the _worst_ criminal in the eye of ecclesiastical law)
is capable of giving evidence. Husbands and wives may witness one
against the other; and the testimony of children was received as
good evidence.

The ninth and tenth chapters consider the question 'whether a
defence was to be allowed; if an advocate defended his client
beyond what was requisite, whether it was not reasonable that he
too should be considered guilty; for he is a patron of witches
and heretics.... Thirteenth chapter: What the judge has to notice
in the torture-chamber. Witches who have given themselves up for
years, body and soul, to the devil, are made by him so insensible
to pain on the rack, that they rather allow themselves to be torn
to pieces than confess. Fourteenth chapter: Upon torture and the
mode of racking. In order to bring the accused to voluntary
confession, you may promise her her life; which promise, however,
may afterwards be withdrawn. If the witch does not confess the
first day, the torture to be continued the second and third days.
But here the difference between continuing and repeating is
important. The torture may not be _continued_ without fresh
evidence, but it may be _repeated_ according to judgment.
Fifteenth chapter: Continuance of the discovery of a witch by her
marks. Amongst other signs, weeping is one. It is a damning thing
if the accused, on being brought up, cannot shed tears. The
clergy and judges lay their hands on the head of the accused, and
adjure her by the hot tears of the Most Glorified Virgin that in
case of her innocence, she shed abundant tears in the name of God
the Father.'[75]

  [75] Ennemoser's _History of Magic_. Translated by W.
  Howitt. There are three kinds of men whom witchcraft cannot
  touch--magistrates; clergymen exercising the pious rites of
  the Church; and saints, who are under the immediate
  protection of the angels.

The 'Bull' and 'Malleus' were the code and textbook of Witchcraft
amongst the Catholics, as the Act and 'Demonologie' of James VI.
were of the Protestants. Perhaps the most important result of the
former was to withdraw entirely the authorised prosecution and
punishment of the criminals from the civil to the ecclesiastical
tribunals. Formerly they had a divided jurisdiction. At the
same time the fury of popular and judicial fanaticism was
greatly inflamed by this new sanction. Immediately, and almost
simultaneously, in different parts of Europe, heretical witches
were hunted up, tortured, burned, or hanged; and those parts of
the Continent most infected with the widening heresy suffered
most. The greater number in Germany seems to show that the
dissentients from Catholic dogma there were rapidly increasing,
some time before Luther thundered out his denunciations. An
unusual storm of thunder and lightning in the neighbourhood of
Constance was the occasion of burning two old women, Ann Mindelen
and one 'Agnes.'[76] One contemporary writer asserts that 1,000
persons were put to death in one year in the district of Como;
and Remigius, one of the authorised _inquisitores pravitatis
hæreticæ_, boasts of having burned 900 in the course of fifteen
years. Martin del Rio states 500 were executed in Geneva in
the short space of three months in 1515; and during the next
five years 40 were burned at Ravensburgh. Great numbers suffered
in France at the same period. At Calahorra, in Spain, in 1507,
a vast _auto-da-fé_ was exhibited, when 39 women, denounced
as sorceresses, were committed to the flames--religious
carnage attested by the unsuspected evidence of the judges and
executioners themselves.

  [76] Hutchinson's _Historical Essay concerning Witchcraft_,
  chap ii.

It is opportune here to examine the common beliefs of demonology
and sorcery as they existed in Europe. Christian demonology is a
confused mixture of pagan, Oriental, and Christian ideas. The
Christian Scriptures have seemed to suggest and sanction a
constant personal interference of the 'great adversary,' who is
always traversing the earth 'seeking whom he may devour;' and his
popular figure is represented as a union of the great dragon,
the satyrs, and fauns. Nor does he often appear without one or
other of his recognised marks--the cloven foot, the goat's
horns, beard, and legs, or the dragon's tail. With young and
good-looking witches he is careful to assume the recommendations
of a young and handsome man, whilst it is not worth while to
disguise so unprepossessing peculiarities in his incarnate
manifestations to _old_ women, the enjoyment of whose souls is
the great purpose of seduction.

Sir Thomas Browne ('Vulgar Errors'), a man of much learning and
still more superstitious fancy, speciously explains the
phenomenon of the cloven foot. He suggests that 'the ground of
this opinion at first might be his frequent appearing in the
shape of a goat, which answers this description. This was the
opinion of the ancient Christians concerning the apparitions of
_panites_, fauns, and satyrs: and of this form we read of one
that appeared to Anthony in the wilderness. The same is also
confirmed from exposition of Holy Scripture. For whereas it is
said "Thou shalt not offer unto devils," the original word is
_Seghuirim_, i. e. rough and hairy goats; because in that shape
the devil most often appeared, as is expounded by the rabbins, as
Tremellius hath also explained; and as the word _Ascimah_, the
God of Emath, is by some explained.' Dr. Joseph Mede, a pious and
learned divine, author of the esteemed 'Key to the Apocalypse,'
pronounces that 'the devil could not appear in human shape while
man was in his integrity, because he was a spirit fallen from his
first glorious perfection, and therefore must appear in such
shape which might argue his imperfection and abasement, which was
the shape of a beast; otherwise [he plausibly contends] no reason
can be given why he should not rather have appeared to Eve in the
shape of a woman than of a serpent. But since the fall of man the
case is altered; now we know he can take upon him the shape of a
man. He appears in the shape of man's imperfection rather for age
or deformity, as like an old man (for so the witches say); and,
perhaps, it is not altogether false, which is vulgarly affirmed,
that the devil appearing in human shape has always a deformity
of some uncouth member or other, as though he could not yet take
upon him human shape entirely, for that man is not entirely and
utterly fallen as he is.' Whatever form he may assume, the
cloven foot must always be visible under every disguise; and
Othello looks first for that fabulous but certain sign when he
scrutinises his treacherous friend.

Reginald Scot's reminiscences of what was instilled into him in
the nursery may possibly occur to some even at this day. 'In our
childhood,' he complains, 'our mothers' maids have so terrified
us with an ugly devil having horns on his head, fire in his
mouth, a tail in his breech, eyes like a bison, fangs like a dog,
a skin like a _niger_, a voice roaring like a lion, whereby we
start and are afraid when we hear one cry Boh!' Chaucer has
expressed the belief of his age on the subject. It seems to have
been a proper duty of a parish priest to bring to the notice of
his ecclesiastical superior, with other crimes, those of sorcery.
The Friar describes his 'Erchedeken' as one--

    That boldely didde execucioun
    In punyschying of fornicacioun,
    Of wicchecraft....

This ecclesiastic employed in his service a subordinate
'sompnour,' who, in the course of his official duty, one day
meets a devil, whose 'dwellynge is in Helle,' who condescends to
enlighten the officer on the dark subject of demon-apparitions:--

    When us liketh we can take us on
    Or ellis make you seme that we ben schape
    Som tyme like a man or like an ape;
    Or like an aungel can I ryde or go:
    It is no wonder thing though it be so,
    A lowsy jogelour can deceyve the;
    And, parfay, yet can I more craft than he.

To the question why they are not satisfied with _one_ shape for
all occasions, the devil answers at length:--

    Som tyme we ben Goddis instrumentes
    And menes to don his commandementes,
    Whan that him liste, upon his creatures
    In divers act and in divers figures.
    Withouten him we have no might certayne
    If that him liste to stonden ther agayne.
    And som tyme at our prayer, have we leve
    Only the body and not the soule greve;
    Witnesse on Job, whom we didde ful wo.
    And som tyme have we might on bothe two,
    That is to say of body and soule eeke
    And som tyme be we suffred for to seeke
    Upon a man and don his soule unrest
    And not his body, and al is for the best.
    Whan he withstandeth our temptacioun
    It is a cause of his savacioun.
    Al be it so it was naught our entente
    He schuld be sauf, but that we wolde him hente.
    And som tyme we ben servaunt unto man
    As to the Erchebisschop Saynt Dunstan;
    And to the Apostolis servaunt was I.

    *       *       *       *       *

    Som tyme we fegn, and som tyme we ryse
    With dede bodies, in ful wonder wyse,
    And speke renably, and as fayre and wel
    As to the Phitonissa dede Samuel:
    And yit wil som men say, it was not he.
    I do no fors of your divinitie.[77]

  [77] _Canterbury Tales._ T. Wright's Text. Chaucer, the
  English Boccaccio in verse, attacks alike with his sarcasms
  the Church and the female sex.

Jewish theology, expanded by their leading divines, includes a
formidable array of various demons; and the whole of nature in
Christian belief was peopled with every kind

    'Of those demons that are found
     In fire, air, flood, or under ground.'

Various opinions have been held concerning the nature of devils
and demons. Some have maintained, with Tertullian, that they are
'the souls of baser men.' It is a disputed question whether they
are mortal or immortal; subject to, or free from, pain. 'Psellus,
a Christian, and sometime tutor to Michael Pompinatius, Emperor
of Greece, a great observer of the nature of devils, holds they
are corporeal, and live and die: ... that they feel pain if they
be hurt (which Cardan confirms, and Scaliger justly laughs him to
scorn for); and if their bodies be cut, with admirable celerity
they come together again. Austin approves as much; so doth
Hierome, Origen, Tertullian, Lactantius, and many eminent fathers
of the Church; that in their fall their bodies were changed into
a more aerial and gross substance.' The Platonists and some
rabbis, Porphyrius, Plutarch, Zosimus, &c., hold this opinion,
which is scornfully denied by some others, who assert that they
only deceive the eyes of men, effecting no real change. Cardan
believes 'they feed on men's souls, and so [a worthy origin]
belike that we have so many battles fought in all ages,
countries, is to make them a feast and their sole delight: but if
displeased they fret and chafe (for they feed belike on the souls
of beasts, as we do on their bodies) and send many plagues
amongst us.'

Their exact numbers and orders are differently estimated by
different authorities. It is certain that they fill the air, the
earth, the water, as well as the subterranean globe. The air,
according to Paracelsus, is not so full of flies in summer as it
is at all times of invisible devils. Some writers, professing to
follow Socrates and Plato, determine nine sorts. Whatever or
wherever the supralunary may be, our world is more interested in
the sublunary tribes. These are variously divided and subdivided.
One authority computes six distinct kinds--Fiery, Aerial,
Terrestrial, Watery, Subterranean and Central: these last
inhabiting the central regions of the interior of the earth. The
Fiery are those that work 'by blazing stars, fire-drakes; they
counterfeit suns and moons, stars oftentimes. The Aerial live,
for the most part, in the air, cause many tempests, thunder and
lightning, tear oaks, fire steeples, houses; strike men and
beasts; make it rain stones, as in Livy's time, wool, frogs, &c.;
counterfeit armies in the air, strange noises ... all which Guil.
Postellus useth as an argument (as, indeed, it is) to persuade
them that will not believe there be spirits or devils. They
cause whirlwinds on a sudden and tempestuous storms, which,
though our meteorologists generally refer to natural causes, yet
I am of Bodine's mind, they are more often caused by those aerial
devils in their several quarters; for they ride on the storms as
when a desperate man makes away with himself, which, by hanging
or drowning, they frequently do, as Kormannus observes,
_tripudium agentes_, dancing and rejoicing at the death of a
sinner. These can corrupt the air, and cause sickness, plagues,
storms, shipwrecks, fires, inundations.... Nothing so familiar
(if we may believe those relations of Saxo Grammaticus, Olaus
Magnus, &c.) as for witches and sorcerers in Lapland, Lithuania,
and all over Scandia to sell winds to mariners and cause
tempests, which Marcus Paulus, the Venetian, relates likewise of
the Tartars.[78]

  [78] It is still the custom of the Tartar or Thibetian
  Lamas, or at least of some of them, to scatter charms to the
  winds for the benefit of travellers. M. Huc's _Travels in
  Tartary, Thibet, &c._

'These are they which Cardan thinks desire so much carnal
copulation with witches (Incubi and Succubi), transform bodies,
and are so very cold if they be touched, and that serve
magicians.... Water devils are those naiads or water nymphs which
have been heretofore conversant about waters and rivers. The
water (as Paracelsus thinks) is their chaos, wherein they live
... appearing most part (saith Trithemius) in women's shapes.
Paracelsus hath several stories of them that have lived and been
married to mortal men, and so continued for certain years with
them, and after, upon some dislike, have forsaken them. Such an
one was Egeria, with whom Numa was so familiar, Diana, Ceres,
&c.... Terrestrial devils are Lares, Genii, Fauns, Satyrs,
Wood-nymphs, Foliots, Fairies, Robin Goodfellows, Trulli; which,
as they are most conversant with men, so they do them most harm.
Some think it was they alone that kept the heathen people in awe
of old.... Subterranean devils are as common as the rest, and do
as much harm. Olaus Magnus makes six kinds of them, some bigger,
some less, commonly seen about mines of metals, and are some of
them noxious; some again do no harm (they are guardians of
treasure in the earth, and cause earthquakes). The last (sort)
are conversant about the centre of the earth, to torture the
souls of damned men to the day of judgment; their egress and
ingress some suppose to be about Ætna, Lipari, Hecla, Vesuvius,
Terra del Fuego, because many shrieks and fearful cries are
continually heard thereabouts, and familiar apparitions of dead
men, ghosts, and goblins.'

As for the particular offices and operations of those various
tribes, 'Plato, in _Critias_, and after him his followers,
gave out that they were men's governors and keepers, our
lords and masters, as we are of our cattle. They govern
provinces and kingdoms by oracles, auguries, dreams, rewards
and punishments, prophecies, inspirations, sacrifices and
religious _superstitions_, varied in as many forms as there be
diversity of spirits; they send wars, plagues, peace, sickness,
health, dearth, plenty, as appears by those histories of
Thucydides, Livius, Dionysius Halicarnassensis, with many others,
that are full of their wonderful stratagems.' They formerly devoted
themselves, each one, to the service of particular individuals as
familiar demons, 'private spirits.' Numa, Socrates, and many
others were indebted to their _Genius_. The power of the devil is
not limited to the body. 'Many think he can work upon the body,
but not upon the mind. But experience pronounceth otherwise, that
he can work both upon body and mind. Tertullian is of this
opinion.'

The causes and inducements of 'possession' are many. One writer
affirms that 'the devil being a slender, incomprehensible spirit
can easily insinuate and wind himself into human bodies, and
cunningly couched in our bowels, vitiate our healths, terrify our
souls with fearful dreams, and shake our minds with furies. They
go in and out of our bodies as bees do in a hive, and so provoke
and tempt us as they perceive our temperature inclined of itself
and most apt to be deluded.... Agrippa and Lavater are persuaded
that this humour [the melancholy] invites the devil into it,
wheresoever it is in extremity, and, of all other, melancholy
persons are most subject to diabolical temptations and illusions,
and most apt to entertain them, and the devil best able to work
upon them. 'But whether,' declares Burton, 'by obsession, or
possession, or otherwise, I will not determine; 'tis a difficult
question.'[79]

  [79] _The Anatomy of Melancholy_, by Democritus junior;
  edited by Democritus minor. Part i. sect. 2. An equally
  copious and curious display of learning. Few authors,
  probably, have been more plagiarised.

The mediævalists believed themselves surrounded everywhere by
spiritual beings; but unlike the ancients, they were convinced
not so much that they were the peculiar care of heaven as that
they were the miserable victims of hellish malice, ever seeking
their temporal as well as eternal destruction; a fact apparent in
the whole mediæval literature and art.[80]

  [80] Sismondi (_Literature of the South of Europe_) has
  observed of the greatest epic of the Middle Age, that
  'Dante, in common with many fathers of the Church, under the
  supposition that paganism, in the persons of the infernal
  gods, represented the fallen angels, has made no scruple to
  adopt its fables.' Tasso, at a later period, introduces the
  deities of heathendom. In the _Gerusalemme Liberata_ they
  sit in council to frustrate the plans and destroy the forces
  of the Christian leaders before Jerusalem (iv). Ismeno, a
  powerful magician in the ranks of the Turks, brings up a
  host of diabolic allies to guard the wood which supplied the
  infidels with materials for carrying on the siege of the
  city (xiii.). And the masterpieces of art of Guido or
  Raffaelle, which excite at once admiration and despair in
  their modern disciples, consecrated and immortalised the
  vulgar superstition.

Glanvil's conjectures on the cause of the _comparative_ rarity of
demoniac and other spiritual apparitions in general may interest
the credulous or curious reader. ''Tis very probable,' reasons
the Doctor, 'that the state wherein they are will not easily
permit palpable intercourses between the bad genii and mankind:
since 'tis like enough their own laws and government do not allow
their frequent excursions into the world. Or it may with great
probability be supposed that 'tis a very hard and painful thing
for them to force their thin and _tenuious_ bodies into a visible
consistence, and such shapes as are necessary for their designs
in their correspondence with witches. For in this action their
bodies must needs be exceedingly compressed, which cannot well be
without a painful sense. And this is, perhaps, a reason why there
are so few apparitions, and why appearing spirits are commonly in
such a hurry to be gone, viz. that they may be delivered of the
unnatural pressure of their tender vehicles,[81] which I confess
holds more in the apparition of good than evil spirits ... the
reason of which probably is the greater subtlety and tenuity of
the former, which will require far greater degrees of compression
and consequently of pain to make them visible; whereas the latter
are feculent and gross, and so nearer allied to palpable
existences, and more easily reducible to appearance and
visibility.'[82]

  [81] So specious a theory must have occurred to, and its
  propriety will easily be recognised by, the spirit and ghost
  advocates of the present day.

  [82] _Sadducismus Triumphatus._ Considerations about
  Witchcraft. Sect. xi.

'Palpable intercourses between the bad genii and mankind' are
more frequent than Dr. Glanvil was disposed to believe; and he
must have been conversant with the acts of Incubus and Succubus.
In the first age (orbe novo c[oe]loque recenti) under the
Saturnian regime, 'while yet there was no fear of Jove,'[83]
innocence prevailed undisturbed; but soon as the silver age was
inaugurated by the usurpation of Jove, _liaisons_ between gods
and mortals became frequent. Love affairs between good or bad
'genii' and mankind are of common occurrence in the mythology of
most peoples. In the romance-tales of the middle age lovers find
themselves unexpectedly connected with some mysterious being of
inhuman kind. The writers in defence of witchcraft quote Genesis
vi. in proof of the reality of such intercourses; and Justin
Martyr and Tertullian, the great apologists of Christianity, and
others of the Fathers, interpret _Filios Dei_ to be angels or
evil spirits who, enamoured with the beauty of the women, begot
the primeval giants.[84]

  [83] 'Jove nondum Barbato.'

  [84] Milton indignantly exclaims, alluding to this common
  fancy of the leaders of the Primitive Church, 'Who would
  think him fit to write an apology for Christian faith to the
  Roman Senate that could tell them "how of the angels"--of
  which he must needs mean those in Genesis called the Sons of
  God--"mixing with women were begotten the devils," as good
  Justin Martyr in his Apology told them.' (_Reformation in
  England_, book i.). And 'Clemens Alexandrinus, Sulpicius
  Severus, Eusebius, &c., make a twofold fall of angels--one
  from the beginning of the world; another a little before the
  deluge, as Moses teacheth us, openly professing that these
  _genii_ can beget and have carnal copulation with woman'
  (_Anatomy of Melancholy_, part i.). Robert Burton gives in
  his adhesion to the sentiments of Lactantius (xiv. 15). It
  seems that the later Jewish devils owe their origin
  (according to the Talmudists, as represented by Pererius in
  the _Anatomy_) to a former wife of Adam, called Lilis, the
  predecessor of Eve.

Some tremendous results of diabolic connections appear in the
metrical romances of the twelfth or thirteenth century, as well
as in those early Anglo-Norman chroniclers or fabulists, who have
been at the pains to inform us of the pre-historic events of
their country. The author of the romance-poem of the well-known
Merlin--so famous in British prophecy--in introducing his hero,
enters upon a long dissertation on the origin of the infernal
arts. He informs us on the authority of 'David the prophet, and
of Moses,' that the greater part of the angels who rebelled under
the leadership of Lucifer, lost their former power and beauty,
and became 'fiendes black:' that instead of being precipitated
into 'helle-pit,' many remained in mid-air, where they still
retain the faculty of seducing mortals by assuming whatever
shape they please. These had been much concerned at the
miraculous birth of Christ; but it was hoped to counteract the
salutary effects of that event, by producing from some virgin a
semi-demon, whose office it should be to disseminate sorcerers
and wicked men. For this purpose the devil[85] prepares to seduce
three young sisters; and proceeds at once in proper disguise to
an old woman, with whose avarice and cunning he was well
acquainted. Her he engaged by liberal promises to be mediatrix in
the seduction of the elder sister, whom he was prevented from
attempting in person by the precautions of a holy hermit. Like
'the first that fell of womankind,' the young lady at length
consented; was betrayed by the _fictitious_ youth, and condemned
by the law to be burnt alive.

  [85] Probably,

       'Belial, the dissolutest spirit that fell,
        The sensualist; and after Asmodai
        The fleshliest Incubus.'--_Par. Reg._

The same fate, excepting the fearful penalty, awaited the second.
And now, too late, the holy hermit became aware of his disastrous
negligence. He strictly enjoined on the third and remaining
sister a constant watch. Her security, however, was the cause of
her betrayal. On one occasion, in a moment of remissness, she
forgot her prayers and the sign of the cross, before retiring for
the night. No longer excluded, the fiend, assuming human shape,
effected his purpose. In due time a son was born, whose
parentage was sufficiently evinced by an entire covering of black
hair, although his limbs were well-formed, and his features fine.
Fortunately, the careless guardian had exactly calculated the
moment of the demon's birth; and no sooner was he informed of the
event, than the new-born infant was borne off to the regenerating
water, when he was christened by the name of Merlin; the fond
hopes of the demons being for this time, at least, irretrievably
disappointed. How Merlin, by superhuman prowess and knowledge,
defeated the Saracens (Saxons) in many bloody battles; his
magical achievements and favour at the court of King Vortigern
and his successors, are fully exhibited by the author of the
history.[86] Geoffrey of Monmouth recounts them as matters of
fact; and they are repeated by Vergil in the History of Britain,
composed under the auspices of Henry VIII.

  [86] See _Early English Metrical Romances_, ed. by Sir H.
  Ellis.

By the ancients, whole peoples were sometimes said to be derived
from these unholy connections. Jornandes, the historian of the
Goths, is glad to be able to relate their hated rivals, the Huns
(of whom the Kalmuck Tartars are commonly said to be the modern
representatives), to have owed their origin to an intercourse of
the Scythian witches with infernal spirits. The extraordinary
form and features of those dreaded emigrants from the steppes of
Tartary, had suggested to the fear and hatred of their European
subjects, a fable which Gibbon supposes might have been derived
from a more pleasing one of the Greeks.[87]

  [87] A sufficiently large collection from ancient and modern
  writers of the facts of _inhuman_ connections may be seen in
  the _Anatomy of Melancholy_, part iii. sect. 2. Having
  repeated the assertions of previous authors proving the fact
  of intercourses of human with inferior species of animals,
  Burton fortifies his own opinion of their reality by
  numerous authorities. If those stories be true, he reasons,
  that are written of Incubus and Succubus, of nymphs,
  lascivious fauns, satyrs, and those heathen gods which were
  devils, those lascivious Telchines of whom the Platonists
  tell so many fables; or those familiar meetings in our day
  [1624] and company of witches and devils, there is some
  probability for it. I know that Biarmannus, Wierus, and some
  others stoutly deny it ... but Austin (lib. xv. _de Civit.
  Dei_) doth acknowledge it. And he refers to Plutarch, _Vita
  Numæ; Wierus, de Præstigiis Dæmon., Giraldus Cambrensis,
  Malleus Malef., Jacobus Reussus, Godelman, Erastus, John
  Nider, Delrio, Lipsius, Bodin, Pererius, King James, &c_.
  The learned and curious work of the melancholy Student of
  Christ Church and Oxford Rector has been deservedly
  commended by many eminent critics. That 'exact mathematician
  and curious calculator of nativities' calculated exactly,
  according to Anthony Wood (_Athenæ Oxon._), the period of
  his own death--1639.

The acts of Incubus assume an important part in witch-trials and
confessions. Incubus is the visitor of females, Succubus of
males. Chaucer satirises the gallantries of the vicarious Incubus
by the mouth of the wife of Bath (that practical admirer of
Solomon and the Samaritan woman),[88] who prefaces her tale with
the assurance:--

    That maketh that ther ben no fayeries,
    For ther as wont was to walken an elf
    Ther walketh noon but the _Lymitour_ himself.

    *       *       *       *       *

    Women may now go safely up and downe;
    In every busch and under every tre
    Ther is noon other _Incubus_ but he.

  [88] The wife of Bath, who had buried only her fifth
  husband, must appear modest by comparison. Not to mention
  Seneca's or Martial's assertions or insinuations, St. Jerome
  was acquainted with the case of a woman who had buried her
  _twenty-second_ husband, whose conjugal capacity, however,
  was exceeded by the Dutch wife who, on the testimony of
  honest John Evelyn, had buried her _twenty-fifth_ husband!

Reginald Scot has devoted several chapters of his work to a
relation of the exploits of Incubus.[89] But he honestly warns
his readers 'whose chaste ears cannot well endure to hear of such
lecheries (gathered out of the books of divinity of great
authority) to turn over a few leaves wherein I have, like a
groom, thrust their stuff, even that which I myself loath, as
into a stinking corner: howbeit none otherwise, I hope, but that
the other parts of my writing shall remain sweet.' He repeats a
story from the 'Vita Hieronymi,' which seems to insinuate some
suspicion of the character of a certain Bishop Sylvanus. It
relates that one night Incubus invaded a certain lady's bedroom.
Indignant at so unusual, or at least disguised, an apparition,
the lady cried out loudly until the guests of the house came and
found it under the bed in the likeness of the bishop; 'which holy
man,' adds Scot, 'was much defamed thereby.' Another tradition or
legend seems to reflect upon the chastity of the greatest saint
of the Middle Ages.[90] The superhuman oppression of Incubus is
still remembered in the proverbial language of the present day.
The horrors of the infernal compacts and leagues, as exhibited in
the fates of wizards or magicians at the last hour, formed one of
the most popular scenes on the theatrical stage. Christopher
Marlow, in 'The Life and Death of Dr. Faustus,' and Robert
Greene, in 'Friar Bacon and Friar Bungay,' in the Elizabethan
age, dramatised the common, conception of the Compact.

  [89] See the fourth book of the _Discoverie_.

  [90] 'It is written in the legend of St. Bernard,' we are
  told, 'that a pretty wench that had the use of Incubus his
  body by the space of six or seven years in Aquitania (being
  belike weary of him for that he waxed old), would needs go to
  St. Bernard another while. But Incubus told her if she would
  so forsake him, he would be revenged upon her. But befal what
  would, she went to St. Bernard, who took her his staff and
  bad her lay it in the bed beside her. And, indeed, the devil,
  fearing the staff or that St. Bernard lay there himself,
  durst not approach into her chamber that night. What he did
  afterwards I am uncertain.' This story will not appear so
  evidential to the reader as Scot seems to infer it to be. If
  any credit is to be given to the strong insinuations of
  Protestant divines of the sixteenth century, the 'holy bishop
  Sylvanus' is not the only example among the earlier saints of
  the frailty of human nature.