CHAPTER VIII.

     The Literature of Europe in the Seventeenth Century proves
     the Universality and Horror of Witchcraft--The most acute
     and most liberal Men of Learning convinced of its
     Reality--Erasmus and Francis Bacon--Lawyers prejudiced by
     Legislation--Matthew Hale's judicial Assertion--Sir Thomas
     Browne's Testimony--John Selden--The English Church least
     Ferocious of the Protestant Sects--Jewell and
     Hooker--Independent Tolerance--Witchcraft under the
     Presbyterian Government--Matthew Hopkins--Gaule's 'Select
     Cases of Conscience'--Judicial and Popular Methods of
     Witch-discovery--Preventive Charms--Witchfinders a legal and
     numerous Class in England and Scotland--Remission in the
     Severity of the Persecution under the Protectorship.


Had we not the practical proof of the prevalence of the credit of
the black art in accomplished facts, the literature of the first
half of the seventeenth century would be sufficient testimony to
its horrid dominion. The works of the great dramatists, the
writings of men of every class, continually suppose the universal
power and horror of witchcraft. Internal evidence is abundant.
The witches of Macbeth are no fanciful creation, and Shakspeare's
representation of La Pucelle's fate is nothing more than a copy
from life. What the vulgar superstition must have been may be
easily conceived when men of the greatest genius or learning
credited the possibility, and not only a theoretical but actual
occurrence, of these infernal phenomena. Gibbon is at a loss to
account for the fact that the acute understanding of the learned
Erasmus, who could see through much more plausible fables,
believed firmly in witchcraft.[137] Francis Bacon, the advocate
and second founder of the inductive method and first apostle of
the Utilitarian philosophy, opposed though he might have been to
the vulgar persecution, was not able to get rid of the principles
upon which the creed was based.[138] Sir Edward Coke, his
contemporary, the most acute lawyer of the age, or (as it is
said) of any time, ventured even to define the devil's agents in
witchcraft. Sir Thomas Browne (author of 'Pseudodoxia Epidemica'
or 'Vulgar Errors!'), a physician and writer of considerable
merit, and Sir Matthew Hale, in 1664, proved their faith, the one
by his solemn testimony in open court, the other by his still
more solemn sentence.

  [137] See _Miscellaneous Works: Abstract of my Readings_.

  [138] 'Consorting with them [the unclean spirits who have
  fallen from their first estate] and all use of their
  assistance is unlawful; much more any worship or veneration
  whatsoever. But a contemplation and knowledge of their
  nature, power, illusions, not only from passages of sacred
  scripture but _from reason or experience_, is not the least
  part of spiritual wisdom. So truly the Apostle, "We are not
  ignorant of his wiles." And it is not less permissible in
  theology to investigate the nature of demons, than in physics
  to investigate the nature of drugs, or in ethics the nature
  of vice.'--_De Augmentis Scientiarum_, lib. iii. 2.

If theologians were armed by the authority or their
interpretation of Scripture, lawyers were no less so by that of
the Statute Book. Judge Hale, in an address to the jury at Bury
St. Edmund's, carefully weighing evidence, and, summing up,
assures them he did 'not in the least doubt there are witches:
first, because _the Scriptures affirmed it_; secondly, because
the _wisdom of all nations_, particularly of our own, _had
provided laws_ against witchcraft which implied their belief of
such a crime.'[139] Sir Thomas Browne, who gave his professional
experience at this trial, to the effect that the devil often acts
upon human bodies by natural means, afflicting them in a more
surprising manner through the diseases to which they are usually
subject; and that in the particular case, the fits (of vomiting
nails, needles, deposed by other witnesses) might be natural,
only raised to a great degree by the subtlety of the devil
cooperating with the malice of the witches, employs a well-known
argument when he declares ('Religio Medici'), 'Those that to
confute their incredulity desire to see apparitions shall
questionless never behold any. The devil hath these already in a
heresy as capital as witchcraft; and to appear to them were _but_
to convert them.'

  [139] Unfortunately for the cause of truth and right, Sir
  Matthew Hale's reasons are not an exceptional illustration
  of the mischief according to Roger Bacon's experience of
  'three very bad arguments we are always using--This has been
  shown to be so; This is customary; This is universal:
  Therefore it must be kept to.' Sir Thomas Browne, unable, as
  a man of science, to accept in every particular alleged the
  actual bonâ fide reality of the devil's power, makes a
  compromise, and has 'recourse to a fraud of Satan,'
  explaining that he is in reality but a clever juggler, a
  transcendent physician who knows how to accomplish what is
  in relation to us a prodigy, in knowing how to use natural
  forces which our knowledge has not yet discovered. Such an
  unworthy compromise was certainly not fitted to arouse men
  from their 'cauchemar démonologique.'--See _Révue des Deux
  Mondes_, Aug. 1, 1858.

John Selden, a learned lawyer, but of a liberal mind, was gifted
with a large amount of common sense, and it might be juster to
attribute the _dictum_ which has been supposed to betray 'a
lurking belief' to an excess of legal, rather than to a defect of
intellectual, perception. Selden, inferring that 'the law against
witches does not prove there be any, but it punishes the malice
of those people that use such means to take away men's lives,'
proceeds to assert that 'if one should profess that by turning
his hat thrice and crying "Buz," he could take away a man's life
(though in truth he could do no such thing), yet this were a just
law made by the state, that whosoever shall turn his hat ... with
an intention to take away a man's life, should be put to
death.'[140]

  [140] _Table Talk or Discourses_ of John Selden. Although it
  must be excepted to the lawyer's summary mode of dealing
  with an imaginary offence, we prefer to give that eminent
  patriot at least the benefit of the doubt, as to his belief
  in witchcraft.

If men of more liberal sentiments were thus enslaved to old
prejudices, it is not surprising that the Church, not leading but
following, should firmly maintain them. Fortunately for the
witches, without the motives actuating in different ways
Catholics and Calvinists, and placed midway between both parties,
the reformed English Church was not so much interested in
identifying her crimes with sorcerers as in maintaining the less
tremendous formulæ of Divine right, Apostolical succession, and
similar pretensions. Yet if they did not so furiously engage
themselves in actual witch-prosecutions, Anglican divines have
not been slow in expressly or impliedly affirming the reality of
diabolical interposition. Nor can the most favourable criticism
exonerate them from the reproach at least of having witnessed
without protestation the barbarous cruelties practised in the
name of heaven; and the eminent names of Bishop Jewell, the great
apologist of the English Church, and of the author of the
'Ecclesiastical Polity,' among others less eminent, may be
claimed by the advocates of witchcraft as respectable authorities
in the Established Church. The 'judicious' Hooker affirms that
the evil spirits are dispersed, some in the air, some on the
earth, some in the waters, some among the minerals, in dens and
caves that are under the earth, labouring to obstruct and, if
possible, to destroy the works of God. They were the _dii
inferi_ [the old persuasion] of the heathen worshipped in
oracles, in idols, &c.[141] The privilege of 'casting out devils'
was much cherished and long retained in the Established Church.

  [141] Quoted in Howitt's _History of the Supernatural_. The
  author has collected a mass of evidence 'demonstrating an
  universal faith,' a curious collection of various
  superstition. He is indignant at the colder faith of the
  Anglican Church of later times.

During the ascendency of the Presbyterian party from 1640 to the
assumption of the Protectorship by Cromwell, witches and
witch-trials increased more than ever; and they sensibly
decreased only when the Independents obtained a superiority.
The adherents of Cromwell, whatever may have been their own
fanatical excesses, were at least exempt from the intolerant
spirit which characterised alike their Anglican enemies and
their old Presbyterian allies. The astute and vigorous intellect
of the great revolutionary leader, the champion of the people
in its struggles for civil and religious liberty, however
much he might affect the forms of the prevailing religious
sentiment, was too sagacious not to be able to penetrate,
with the aid of the counsels of the author of the 'Treatise
of Civil Power in Ecclesiastical Causes,' who so triumphantly
upheld the fundamental principle of Protestantism,[142]
somewhat beneath the surface. In what manner the Presbyterian
Parliament issued commissions for inquiring into the crimes
of sorcery, how zealously they were supported by the clergy
and people, how Matthew Hopkins--immortal in the annals of
English witchcraft--exercised his talents as witchfinder-general,
are facts well known.[143]

  [142] 'Seeing therefore,' infers Milton, the greatest of
  England's patriots as well as poets, 'that no man, no synod,
  no session of men, though called the Church, can judge
  definitively the sense of Scripture to another man's
  conscience, which is well known to be a maxim of the
  Protestant religion; it follows plainly, that he who holds
  in religion that belief or those opinions which to his
  conscience and utmost understanding appear with most
  evidence or probability in the Scripture, though to others
  he seem erroneous, can no more be justly censured for a
  heretic than his censurers, who do but the same thing
  themselves, while they censure him for so doing.... To
  Protestants therefore, whose common rule and touchstone is
  the Scripture, nothing can with more conscience, more
  equity, nothing more Protestantly can be permitted than a
  free and lawful debate at all times by writing, conference,
  or disputation of what opinion soever disputable by
  Scripture.... How many persecutions, then, imprisonments,
  banishments, penalties, and stripes; how much bloodshed,
  have the forcers of conscience to answer for--and
  Protestants rather than Papists!' (_A Treatise of Civil
  Power in Ecclesiastical Causes._) The reasons which induced
  Milton to exclude the Catholics of his day from the general
  toleration are more intelligible and more plausible, than
  those of fifty or sixty years since, when the Rev. Sidney
  Smith published the _Letters of Peter Plymley_.

  [143] Displayed in the satire of _Hudibras_, particularly in
  Part II. canto 3, Part III. 1, and the notes of Zachary Grey.
  The author of this amusing political satire has exposed the
  foibles of the great Puritan party with all the rancour of a
  partisan.

That the strenuous antagonists of despotic dogmas, by whom the
principles of English liberty were first inaugurated, that they
should so fanatically abandon their reason to a monstrous idea,
is additional proof of the universality of superstitious
prejudice. But the conviction, the result of a continual
political religious persecution of their tenets, that if heaven
was on their side Satan and the powers of darkness were still
more inimical, cannot be fully understood unless by referring to
those scenes of murder and torture. Hunted with relentless
ferocity like wild beasts, holding conventicles and prayer
meetings with the sword suspended over their heads, it is not
surprising that at that period these English and Scotch
Calvinists came to believe that they were the peculiar objects of
diabolical as well as human malice. Their whole history during
the first eighty years of the seventeenth century can alone
explain this faith. Besides this genuine feeling, the clergy of
the Presbyterian sect might be interested in maintaining a creed
which must magnify their credit as miracle-workers.[144]

  [144] The author of _Hudibras_, in the interview of the
  Knight and Sidrophel (William Lilly), enumerates the various
  practices and uses of astrology and witchcraft in vogue at
  this time, and employed by Court and Parliament with equal
  eagerness and emulation. Dr. Zachary Grey, the sympathetic
  editor of _Hudibras_, supplies much curious information on
  the subject in extracts from various old writers. 'The
  Parliament,' as he states, 'took a sure way to secure all
  prophecies, prodigies, and almanac-news from stars, &c., in
  favour of their own side, by appointing a licenser thereof,
  and strictly forbidding and punishing all such as were not
  licensed. Their man for this purpose was the famous Booker,
  an astrologer, fortune-teller, almanac-maker, &c. The words
  of his license in Rushorth are very remarkable--for
  mathematics, almanacs, and prognostications. If we may
  believe Lilly, both he and Booker did conjure and
  prognosticate well for their friends the Parliament. He
  tells us, "When he applied for a license for his _Merlinus
  Anglicus Junior_ (in Ap. 1644), Booker wondered at the book,
  made many impertinent obliterations, framed many objections,
  and swore it was not possible to distinguish between a king
  and a parliament; and at last licensed it according to his
  own fancy. Lilly delivered it to the printer, who, being an
  arch-Presbyterian, had five of the ministers to inspect it,
  who could make nothing of it, but said it might be printed;
  for in that he meddled not with their Dagon." (_Lilly's
  Life._) Which opposition to Lilly's book arose from a
  jealousy that he was not then thoroughly in the Parliament's
  interest--which was true; for he frankly confesses, "that
  till the year 1645 he was more Cavalier than Roundhead, and
  so taken notice of; but after that he engaged body and soul
  in the cause of the Parliament."' (_Life._) Lilly was
  succeeded successively by his assistant Henry Coley, and
  John Partridge, the well-known object of Swift's satire.

The years 1644 and 1645 are distinguished as especially abounding
in witches and witchfinders. In the former year, at Manningtree,
a village in Essex, during an outbreak in which several women
were tried and hanged, Matthew Hopkins first displayed his
peculiar talent. Associated with him in his recognised legal
profession was one John Sterne. They proceeded regularly on their
circuit, making a fixed charge for their services upon each
town or village. Swimming and searching for secret marks were
the infallible methods of discovery. Hopkins, encouraged
by an unexpected success, arrogantly assumed the title of
'Witchfinder-General.' His modest charges (as he has told us)
were twenty shillings a town, which paid the expenses of
travelling and living, and an additional twenty shillings a head
for every criminal brought to trial, or at least to execution.

The eastern counties of Huntingdon, Cambridge, Suffolk,
Northampton, Bedford, were chiefly traversed; and some two or
three hundred persons appear to have been sent to the gibbet or
the stake by his active exertions. One of these specially
remembered was the aged _parson_ of a village near Framlingham,
Mr. Lowes, who was hanged at Bury St. Edmund's. The pious Baxter,
an eyewitness, thus commemorates the event: 'The hanging of a
great number of witches in 1645 and 1646 is famously known. Mr.
Calamy went along with the judges on the circuit to hear their
confessions and see that there was no fraud or wrong done them. I
spoke with many understanding, pious, learned, and credible
persons that lived in the counties, and some that went to them in
the prison and heard their sad confessions. Among the rest, an
old _reading_ parson named Lowes, not far from Framlingham, was
one that was hanged, who confessed that he had two imps, and that
one of them was always putting him upon doing mischief; and he
being near the sea as he saw a ship under sail, it moved him to
send it to sink the ship, and he consented and saw the ship sink
before them.' Sterne, Hopkins's coadjutor, in an Apology
published not long afterwards, asserts that Lowes had been
indicted thirty years before for witchcraft; that he had made a
covenant with the devil, sealing it with his blood, and had those
familiars or spirits which sucked on the marks found on his body;
that he had confessed that, besides the notable mischief of
sinking the aforesaid vessel and making fourteen widows in one
quarter of an hour, he had effected many other calamities; that
far from repenting of his wickedness, he rejoiced in the power of
his imps.

The excessive destruction and cruelty perpetrated by the
indiscriminate procedure of the Witchfinder-General incited a Mr.
Gaule, vicar of Great Staughton in Huntingdonshire, to urge some
objections to the inhuman character of his method. Gaule, like
John Cotta before him and others of that class, was provoked to
challenge the propriety of the ordinary prosecutions, not so much
from incredulity as from humanity, which revolted at the
extravagance of the judges' cruelty. In 'Select Cases of
Conscience touching Witches and Witchcraft,' the minister of
Great Staughton describes from personal knowledge one of the
ordinary ways of detecting the guilt of the accused. 'Having
taken the suspected witch, she is placed in the middle of a room
upon a stool or table, cross-legged, or in some other uneasy
position, to which, if she submits not, she is then bound with
cords: there is she watched and kept without meat or sleep for
the space of four-and-twenty hours (for they say within that
time they shall see her imps come and suck); a little hole is
likewise made in the door for the imps to come in at, and, lest
they should come in some less discernible shape, they that watch
are taught to be ever and anon sweeping the room, and if they see
any spiders or flies to kill them; and if they cannot kill them,
then they may be sure they are her imps.'

'Swimming' and 'pricking' were the approved modes of discovery.
By the former method the witch was stripped naked, securely bound
(hands and feet being crossed), rolled up in a blanket or cloth,
and carried to the nearest water, upon which she was laid on her
back, with the alternative of floating or sinking. In case of the
former event (the water not seldom refusing to receive the
wretch, because--declares James I.--they had impiously thrown off
the holy water of baptism) she was rescued for the fire or the
gallows; while, in case of sinking to the bottom, she would be
properly and clearly acquitted of the suspected guilt. Hopkins
prided himself most on his ability for detecting special marks.
Causing the suspected woman to be stripped naked, or as far as
the waist (as the case might be), sometimes in public, this
stigmatic professor began to search for the hidden signs with
unsparing scrutiny. Upon finding a mole or wart or any similar
mark, they tried the 'insensibleness thereof' by inserting
needles, pins, awls, or any sharp-pointed instrument; and in an
old and withered crone it might not be difficult to find
somewhere a more insensitive spot.

Such examinations were conducted with disregard equally for
humanity and decency. All the disgusting circumstances must be
sought for in the works of the writers upon the subject. Reginald
Scot has collected many of the commonest. These marks were
considered to be teats at which the demons or imps were used to
be suckled. Many were the judicial and vulgar methods of
detecting the guilty--by repeating the 'Lord's Prayer;' weighing
against the church Bible; making them shed tears--for a witch can
shed tears only with the left eye, and that only with difficulty
and in limited quantity. The counteracting or preventive charms
are as numerous as curious, not a few being in repute in some
parts at this day. 'Drawing blood' was most effective. Nailing up
a horse-shoe is one of the best-known preventives. That
efficacious counter-charm used to be suspended over the
entrance of churches and houses, and no wizard or witch could
brave it.[145] 'Scoring above the breath' is omnipotent in
Scotland, where the witch was cut or 'scotched' on the face and
forehead. Cutting off secretly a lock of the hair of the accused,
burning the thatch of her roof and the thing bewitched; these
are a few of the least offensive or obscene practices in
counter-charming.[146] In what degree or kind the Fetish-charms
of the African savages are more ridiculous or disgusting than
those popular in England 200 years ago, it would not be easy to
determine.

  [145] Gay's witch complains:

       'Straws, laid across, my pace retard.
        The horse-shoe's nailed, each threshold's guard.
        The stunted broom the wenches hide
        For fear that I should up and ride.
        They stick with pins my bleeding seat,
        And bid me show my secret teat.'

  [146] The various love-charms, amulets, and spells in the
  pharmacy of witchcraft are (like the waxen image known, both
  to the ancient and modern art) equally monstrous and absurd.
  Of a more natural and pleasing sort was the [Greek: himas
  poikilos], the irresistible charm of Aphrodite. Here--

       [Greek:               Thelktêria panta tetykto;
       Enth' eni men philotês, en d' himeros, en d' oaristys,
       Parphasis, hê t' eklepse noon pyka per phroneontôn.]

Matthew Hopkins pursued a lucrative trade in witch-hunting for
some years with much applause and success. His indiscriminating
accusations at last excited either the alarm or the indignation
of his townspeople, if we may believe the tradition suggested
in the well-known verses of Butler, who has no authority,
apparently, for his insinuation ('Hudibras,' ii. 3), that this
eminent _Malleus_ did not die 'the common death of all men.'
However it happened, his death is placed in the year 1647. An
Apology shortly before had been published by him in refutation
of an injurious report gaining ground that he was himself
intimately allied with the devil, from whom he had obtained a
memorandum book in which were entered the names of all the
witches in England. It is entitled 'The Discovery of Witches; in
Answer to several Queries lately delivered to the Judge of Assize
for the County of Norfolk; and now published by Matthew Hopkins,
Witchfinder, for the Benefit of the whole Kingdom. Printed for R.
Royston, at the Angel in Inn Lane, 1647.'[147] It is, indeed,
sufficiently probable that, confident of the increasing coolness,
and perhaps of the wishes, of the magistrates, the mob, ever
ready to wreak vengeance upon a disgraced favourite who has long
abused the public patience, retaliated upon Hopkins a method of
torture he had frequently inflicted upon others.[148]

  [147] Quoted by Sir W. Scott from a copy of this 'very rare
  tract' in his possession.

  [148] Dr. Francis Hutchinson (Historical Essay), referring to
  the verses of Samuel Butler, says that he had often heard
  that some persons, 'out of indignation at the barbarity [of
  the witchfinder], took him and tied his own thumbs and toes,
  as he used to tie others; and when he was put into the water,
  he himself swam as they did.' But whether the usual fate upon
  that event awaited him does not appear. The verses in
  question are the following:--

       'has not he, within a year,
        Hang'd threescore of 'em in one shire,

        *       *       *       *       *

        Who after prov'd himself a witch,
        And made a rod for his own breech?'

  The Knight's Squire on the same occasion reminds his master
  of the more notorious of the devil's tricks of that and the
  last age:--

       'Did not the devil appear to Martin
        Luther in Germany for certain,
        And would have gull'd him with a trick
        But Mart was too, too politic?
        Did he not help the Dutch to purge
        At Antwerp their cathedral church?
        Sing catches to the saints at Mascon,
        And tell them all they came to ask him?
        Appear in divers shapes to Kelly,
        And speak i' th' nun of Loudun's belly?
        Meet with the Parliament's committee
        At Woodstock on a pers'nal treaty?
        ... &c. &c.'

                      _Hudibras_, II. 3.

Hopkins is the most famous of his class on account of his
superior talent; but both in England and Scotland witchfinders,
or _prickers_, as they were sometimes called, before and since
his time abounded--of course most where the superstition raged
fiercest. In Scotland they infested all parts of the country,
practising their detestable but legal trade with entire impunity.
The Scottish prickers enjoyed a great reputation for skill and
success; and on a special occasion, about the time when
Hopkins was practising in the South, the magistrates of
Newcastle-upon-Tyne summoned from Scotland one of great
professional experience to visit that town, then overrun with
witches. The magistrates agreed to pay him all travelling
expenses, and twenty shillings for every convicted criminal. A
bellman was sent round the town to invite all complainants to
prefer their charges. Some thirty women, having been brought to
the town-hall, were publicly subjected to an examination. By the
ordinary process, twenty-seven on this single occasion were
ascertained to be guilty, of whom, at the ensuing assizes,
fourteen women and one man were convicted by the jury and
executed.

Three thousand are said to have suffered for the crime in England
under the supremacy of the Long Parliament. A respite followed on
this bloody persecution when the Independents came into power,
but it was renewed with almost as much violence upon the return
of the Stuarts. The Protectorship had been fitly inaugurated by
the rational protest of a gentleman, witness to the proceedings
at one of the trials, Sir Robert Filmore, in a tract, 'An
Advertizement to the Jurymen of England touching Witches.' This
was followed two years later by a similar protest by one Thomas
Ady, called, 'A Candle in the Dark; or, a Treatise concerning the
Nature of Witches and Witchcraft: being Advice to Judges,
Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace and Grand Jurymen, what to do
before they pass Sentence on such as are arraigned for their
Lives as Witches.' Notwithstanding the general toleration of the
Commonwealth, in 1652, the year before Cromwell assumed the
Dictatorship (1653-1658), there appeared to be a tendency to
return to the old system, and several were executed in different
parts of the country. Six were hanged at Maidstone. 'Some there
were that wished rather they might be burned to ashes, alleging
that it was a received opinion amongst many that the body of a
witch being burned, her blood is thereby prevented from becoming
hereafter hereditary to her progeny in the same evil, while by
hanging it is not; but whether this opinion be erroneous or not,'
the reporter adds, 'I am not to dispute.'