I. CONTINUITY OF THE RELIGION


Of the ancient religion of pre-Christian Britain there are few written
records, but it is contrary to all experience that a cult should die out
and leave no trace immediately on the introduction of a new religion. The
so-called conversion of Britain meant the conversion of the rulers only;
the mass of the people continued to follow their ancient customs and
beliefs with a veneer of Christian rites. The centuries brought a deepening
of Christianity which, introduced from above, gradually penetrated
downwards through one class after another. During this process the laws
against the practice of certain heathen rites became more strict as
Christianity grew in power, the Church tried her strength against 'witches'
in high places and was victorious, and in the fifteenth century open war
was declared against the last remains of heathenism in the famous Bull of
Innocent VIII.

This heathenism was practised only in certain places and among certain
classes of the community. In other places the ancient ritual was either
adopted into, or tolerated by, the Church; and the Maypole dances and other
rustic festivities remained as survivals of the rites of the early cult.

Whether the religion which survived as the witch cult was the same as the
religion of the Druids, or whether it belonged to a still earlier stratum,
is not clear. Though the descriptions of classical authors are rather too
vague and scanty to settle such a point, sufficient remains to show that a
fertility cult did once exist in these islands, akin to similar cults in
the ancient world. Such rites would not be suppressed by the tribes who
entered Great Britain after the withdrawal of the Romans; a continuance of
the cult may therefore be expected among the people whom the Christian
missionaries laboured to convert.

As the early historical records of these islands were made by Christian
ecclesiastics, allowance must be made for the religious bias of the
writers, which caused them to make Christianity appear as the only religion
existing at the time. But though the historical records are silent on the
subject the laws and enactments of the different communities, whether lay
or ecclesiastical, retain very definite evidence of the continuance of the
ancient cults.

In this connexion the dates of the conversion of England are instructive.
The following table gives the principal dates:

597-604. Augustine's mission. London still heathen.
Conversion of Æthelbert, King of Kent. After Æthelbert's
death Christianity suffered a reverse.

604. Conversion of the King of the East Saxons, whose
successor lapsed.

627. Conversion of the King of Northumbria.

628. Conversion of the King of East Anglia.

631-651. Aidan's missions.

635. Conversion of the King of Wessex.

653. Conversion of the King of Mercia.

654. Re-conversion of the King of the East Saxons.

681. Conversion of the King of the South Saxons.

An influx of heathenism occurred on two later occasions: in the ninth
century there was an invasion by the heathen Danes under Guthrum; and in
the eleventh century the heathen king Cnut led his hordes to victory. As in
the case of the Saxon kings of the seventh century, Guthrum and Cnut were
converted and the tribes followed their leaders' example, professed
Christianity, and were baptized.

But it cannot be imagined that these wholesale conversions were more than
nominal in most cases, though the king's religion was outwardly the tribe's
religion. If, as happened among the East Saxons, the king forsook his old
gods, returned to them again, and finally forsook them altogether, the
tribe followed his lead, and, in public at least, worshipped Christ, Odin,
or any other deity whom the king favoured for the moment; but there can be
hardly any doubt that in private the mass of the people adhered to the old
religion to which they were accustomed. This tribal conversion is clearly
marked when a heathen king married a Christian queen, or vice versa; and it
must also be noted that a king never changed his religion without careful
consultation with his chief men.[3] An example of the two religions
existing side by side is found in the account of Redwald, King of the East
Saxons, who 'in the same temple had an altar to sacrifice to Christ, and
another small one to offer victims to devils'.[4]

The continuity of the ancient religion is proved by the references to it in
the classical authors, the ecclesiastical laws, and other legal and
historical records.

1st cent. Strabo, 63 B.C.-A.D. 23.

     'In an island close to Britain, Demeter and Persephone are venerated
     with rites similar to the orgies of Samothrace.'[5]

4th cent. Dionysius says that in islands near Jersey and Guernsey the rites
of Bacchus were performed by the women, crowned with leaves; they danced
and made an even greater shouting than the Thracians.[6]

7th cent. Theodore, Archbishop of Canterbury, 668-690.

The _Liber Poenitentialis_[7] of Theodore contains the earliest
ecclesiastical laws of England. It consists of a list of offences and the
penance due for each offence; one whole section is occupied with details of
the ancient religion and of its rites. Such are:

Sacrifice to devils.

Eating and drinking in a heathen temple, (_a_) in ignorance, (_b_) after
being told by the [Christian] priest that it is sacrilege and the table of
devils, (_c_) as a cult of idols and in honour of idols.

     'Not only celebrating feasts in the abominable places of the heathen
     and offering food there, but also consuming it. Serving this hidden
     idolatry, having relinquished Christ. If anyone at the kalends of
     January goes about as a stag or a bull; that is, making himself into a
     wild animal and dressing in the skin of a herd animal, and putting on
     the heads of beasts; those who in such wise transform themselves into
     the appearance of a wild animal, penance for three years because this
     is devilish.'

_The Laws of Wihtraed_, King of Kent,[8] 690.

Fines inflicted on those who offer to devils.

8th cent. _The Confessionale and Poenitentiale of Ecgberht_, first
Archbishop of York,[9] 734-766.

Prohibition of offerings to devils; of witchcraft; of auguries according to
the methods of the heathen; of vows paid, loosed, or confirmed at wells,
stones, or trees; of the gathering of herbs with any incantation except
Christian prayers.

_The Law of the Northumbrian priests._[10]

     'If then anyone be found that shall henceforth practise any
     heathenship, either by sacrifice or by "fyrt", or in any way love
     witchcraft, or worship idols, if he be a king's thane, let him pay X
     half-marks; half to Christ, half to the king. We are all to love and
     worship one God, and strictly hold one Christianity, and totally
     renounce all heathenship.'

9th cent. _Decree attributed to a General Council of Ancyra._[11]

     'Certain wicked women, reverting to Satan, and seduced by the
     illusions and phantasms of demons, believe and profess that they ride
     at night with Diana on certain beasts, with an innumerable multitude
     of women, passing over immense distances, obeying her commands as
     their mistress, and evoked by her on certain nights.'

10th cent. _Laws of Edward and Guthrum._[12] After 901.

     'If anyone violate christianity, or reverence heathenism, by word or
     by work, let him pay as well _wer_, as _wite_ or _lah-slit_, according
     as the deed may be.'

_Laws of King Athelstan_,[13] 924-940.

     'We have ordained respecting witchcrafts, and _lyblacs_, and
     _morthdaeds_: if anyone should be thereby killed, and he could not
     deny it, that he be liable in his life. But if he will deny it, and at
     the threefold ordeal shall be guilty; that he be cxx days in prison.'

_Ecclesiastical canons of King Edgar_,[14] 959.

     'We enjoin, that every priest zealously promote Christianity, and
     totally extinguish every heathenism; and forbid well worshipings, and
     necromancies, and divinations, and enchantments, and man worshipings,
     and the vain practices which are carried on with various spells, and
     with "frithsplots",[15] and with elders, and also with various other
     trees, and with stones, and with many various delusions, with which
     men do much of what they should not.--And we enjoin, that every
     Christian man zealously accustom his children to Christianity, and
     teach them the Paternoster and the Creed. And we enjoin, that on feast
     days heathen songs and devil's games be abstained from.'

_Laws of King Ethelred_,[16] 978-1016.

     'Let every Christian man do as is needful to him; let him strictly
     keep his Christianity.... Let us zealously venerate right
     Christianity, and totally despise every heathenism.'

11th cent. _Laws of King Cnut_,[17] 1017-1035.

     'We earnestly forbid every heathenism: heathenism is, that men worship
     idols; that is, that they worship heathen gods, and the sun or the
     moon, fire or rivers, water-wells or stones, or forest trees of any
     kind; or love witchcraft, or promote _morth-work_ in any wise.'

13th cent. Witchcraft made into a sect and heresy by the Church. The priest
of Inverkeithing presented before the bishop in 1282 for leading a
fertility dance at Easter round the phallic figure of a god; he was allowed
to retain his benefice.[18]

14th cent. In 1303 the Bishop of Coventry was accused before the Pope for
doing homage to the Devil.[19]

_Trial of Dame Alice Kyteler_, 1324.

Tried for both operative and ritual witchcraft, and found guilty.

_Nider's Formicarius_, 1337.

A detailed account of witches and their proceedings in Berne, which had
been infested by them for more than sixty years.

15th cent. Joan of Arc burnt as a witch, 1431. Gilles de Rais executed as a
witch, 1440.

_Bernardo di Bosco_, 1457.

     Sent by Pope Calixtus III to suppress the witches in Brescia and its
     neighbourhood.

_Bull of Pope Innocent VIII_, 1484.

     'It has come to our ears that numbers of both sexes do not avoid to
     have intercourse with demons, Incubi and Succubi; and that by their
     sorceries, and by their incantations, charms, and conjurations, they
     suffocate, extinguish, and cause to perish the births of women, the
     increase of animals, the corn of the ground, the grapes of the
     vineyard and the fruit of the trees, as well as men, women, flocks,
     herds, and other various kinds of animals, vines and apple trees,
     grass, corn and other fruits of the earth; making and procuring that
     men and women, flocks and herds and other animals shall suffer and be
     tormented both from within and without, so that men beget not, nor
     women conceive; and they impede the conjugal action of men and women.'

It will be seen by the foregoing that so far from the Bull of Pope Innocent
VIII being the beginning of the 'outbreak of witchcraft', as so many modern
writers consider, it is only one of many ordinances against the practices
of an earlier cult. It takes no account of the effect of these practices on
the morals of the people who believed in them, but lays stress only on
their power over fertility; the fertility of human beings, animals, and
crops. In short it is exactly the pronouncement which one would expect from
a Christian against a heathen form of religion in which the worship of a
god of fertility was the central idea. It shows therefore that the witches
were considered to deal with fertility only.

Looked upon in the light of a fertility cult, the ritual of the witches
becomes comprehensible. Originally for the promotion of fertility, it
became gradually degraded into a method for blasting fertility, and thus
the witches who had been once the means of bringing prosperity to the
people and the land by driving out all evil influences, in process of time
were looked upon as being themselves the evil influences, and were held in
horror accordingly.

The actual feelings of the witches towards their religion have been
recorded in very few cases, but they can be inferred from the few records
which remain. The earliest example is from Lorraine in 1408, 'lequel méfait
les susdites dames disoient et confessoient avoir enduré à leur
contentement et saoulement de plaisir que n'avoient eu onc de leur vie en
tel pourchas'.[20] De Lancre took a certain amount of trouble to obtain the
opinions of the witches, whereby he was obviously scandalized.

     'Vne sorciere entre autres fort insigne nous dict qu'elle auoit
     tousiours creu, que la sorcelerie estoit la meilleure
     religion.--Ieanne Dibasson aagee de vingt neuf ans nous dict que le
     sabbat estoit le vray Paradis, où il y a beaucoup plus de plaisir
     qu'on ne peut exprimer. Que ceux qui y vont trouuent le temps si court
     à force de plaisir & de contentem[~e]t, qu'ils n'en peuuent sortir
     sans vn merveilleux regret, de maniere qu'il leur tarde infiniment
     qu'ils n'y reuiennent.--Marie de la Ralde, aagee de vingt huict ans,
     tres belle femme, depose qu'elle auoit vn singulier plaisir d'aller au
     sabbat, si bien que quand on la venoit semondre d'y aller elle y
     alloit comme à nopces: non pas tant pour la liberté & licence qu'on a
     de s'accointer ensemble (ce que par modestie elle dict n'auoir iamais
     faict ny veu faire) mais parce que le Diable tenoit tellement liés
     leurs coeurs & leurs volontez qu'à peine y laissoit il entrer nul
     autre desir.... Au reste elle dict qu'elle ne croyoit faire aucun mal
     d'aller au sabbat, & qu'elle y auoit beaucoup plus de plaisir &
     contentement que d'aller à la Messe, parce que le Diable leur faisoit
     à croire qu'il estoit le vray Dieu, & que la ioye que les sorciers
     prenoyent au sabbat n'estoit qu'vn commencement d'vne beaucoup plus
     grande gloire.--Elles disoyent franchement, qu'elles y alloyent &
     voyoient toutes ces execrations auec vne volupté admirable, & vn desir
     enrager d'y aller & d'y estre, trouuãt les iours trop reculez de la
     nuict pour faire le voyage si desiré, & le poinct ou les heures pour y
     aller trop lentes, & y estant, trop courtes pour vn si agreable seiour
     & delicieux amusement.--En fin il a le faux martyre: & se trouue des
     Sorciers si acharnez à son seruice endiablé, qu'il n'y a torture ny
     supplice qui les estonne, & diriez qu'ils vont au vray martyre & à la
     mort pour l'amour de luy, aussi gayement que s'ils alloient à vn
     festin de plaisir & reioüyssance publique.--Quand elles sont preuenues
     de la Iustice, elles ne pleurent & ne iettent vne seule larme, voire
     leur faux martyre soit de la torture, soit du gibet leur est si
     plaisant, qu'il tarde à plusieurs qu'elles ne soi[~e]t executées à
     mort, & souffr[~e]t fort ioyeusement qu'on leur face le procez, tant
     il leur tarde qu'elles ne soient auec le Diable. Et ne s'impatientent
     de rien tant en leur prison, que de ce qu'elles ne lui peuuent
     tesmoigner c[=o]bi[~e] elles souffrent & desirent souffrir pour
     luy.'[21]

Bodin says, 'Il y en a d'autres, ausquelles Satan promet qu'elles seront
bien heureuses apres cette vie, qui empesche qu'elles ne se repentent, &
meurent obstinees en leur mechanceté'.[22]

Madame de Bourignon's girls at Lille (1661) 'had not the least design of
changing, to quit these abominable Pleasures, as one of them of Twenty-two
Years old one day told me. _No_, said she, _I will not be other than I am;
I find too much content in my Condition_.'[23] Though the English and
Scotch witches' opinions are not reported, it is clear from the evidence
that they were the same as those of the Basses-Pyrénées, for not only did
they join of their own free will but in many cases there seems to have been
no need of persuasion. In a great number of trials, when the witches
acknowledged that they had been asked to become members of the society,
there follows an expression of this sort, 'ye freely and willingly accepted
and granted thereto'. And that they held to their god as firmly as those de
Lancre put to death is equally evident in view of the North Berwick
witches, of Rebecca West and Rose Hallybread, who 'dyed very Stuburn, and
Refractory without any Remorss, or seeming Terror of Conscience for their
abominable Witch-craft';[24] Major Weir, who perished as a witch,
renouncing all hope of heaven;[25] and the Northampton witches, Agnes
Browne and her daughter, who 'were never heard to pray, or to call vppon
God, never asking pardon for their offences either of God or the world in
this their dangerous, and desperate Resolution, dyed'; Elinor Shaw and Mary
Phillips, at their execution 'being desired to say their Prayers, they both
set up a very loud Laughter, calling for the Devil to come and help them
in such a Blasphemous manner, as is not fit to Mention; so that the Sherif
seeing their presumptious Impenitence, caused them to be Executed with all
the Expedition possible; even while they were Cursing and raving, and as
they liv'd the Devils true Factors, so they resolutely Dyed in his
Service': the rest of the Coven also died 'without any confession or
contrition'.[26]