5. _The Baptism_

Records of the baptism of candidates are rare, the rite being possibly
copied from the Christian ceremony and therefore of later date. It does not
seem to occur in England and hardly at all in Scotland. The earliest
mention is in the Basses-Pyrénées (1609), where Jeannette d'Abadie stated
'qu'elle a veu souuent baptiser des enfans au sabbat, qu'elle nous expliqua
estre des enfans des sorcieres & non autres, lesquelles ont accoutume faire
plustost baptiser leurs enfans au sabbat qu'en l'Eglise'.[271] The rite,
however, was practised in Bute in 1662: Margret NcLevine confessed--

     'that being in a litle chamber in Balichtarach the devill came to her
     in the lyknes of a man and deseired hir to goe with him, and that she
     refusing he said I will not [blank] and she gave him [blank] she never
     saw afterward and that she knew it was the devill and after he went
     that he came bak and asked hir to give him hir hand quhich she
     refusing to doe he took hir by the midle finger of the rycht hand
     quhich he had almost cutt off hir and therwith left hir. Her finger
     was so sorely pained for the space of a moneth ther after that ther
     was no pain comparable to it, as also took her by the right leg quhich
     was sorly pained likewayes as also be the devill. Item he came to her
     againe as she was shaking straw in the barne of Ardroscidell in a very
     ugly shape and that there he desired hir to goe with him and she
     refusing he said to her I will either have thy self or then thy heart.
     Item that he healed her sore foot and finger quhich finger is yet be
     nummed. Item that before he haled her that she made a covenant with
     him and promised to doe him any service that he wold imploy hir in.
     Item that he asked quhat was her name. She answered him Margret the
     name that God gave me, and he said to her I baptise the Jonet.'[272]

Isobell NcNicoll 'confessed that as she was in her owne house her alone
drawing acquavittie the devill came to her in the lyknes of a young man and
desyred her to goe with him and confesses that she made a covenant with him
quhairin he promised that she should not want meanes enough and she
promised to be his servand. Item that he baptised her and gave her a new
name and called her Caterine. Item that about a moneth therafter in the
night as she went out of her own back dore she met with the devill and spok
with him.'[273]--Jonet McNicoll 'confesses with remorse that about
hallowday as she was in Mary Moore's house that there appeared to her two
men the on a gross copperfaced man and the other a wele favored young man
and that the copperfaced man quhom she knew to be ane evil spirit bade her
goe with him. Item confesses that she made a covenant with him, and he
promised that she wold not want meines eneugh and she promised to serve him
and that he gave her a new name saying I baptise the Mary.'[274]--Jonet
Morisoune 'traysted with the divill at the Knockanrioch, being the second
tyme of her meeting with him, that shee made covenant with the devill ...
quairin she promised to be his servant etc. that shee asked quhat was his
name his answer was my name is Klareanough and he asked quhat was her name
and she answered Jonet Morisoun, the name that God gave me, and he said
belive not in Christ bot belive in me. I baptise the Margarat.'[275] The
Swedish witches (1669) were also baptized; 'they added, that he caused them
to be baptized too by such Priests as he had there, and made them confirm
their Baptism with dreadful Oaths and Imprecations.'[276] Curiously enough
the most detailed account comes from New England (1692). Mary Osgood, wife
of Captain Osgood, went 'to five mile pond, where she was baptized by the
devil, who dipped her face in the water, and made her renounce her former
baptism, and told her she must be his, soul and body for ever, and that she
must serve him, which she promised to do. She says, the renouncing her
first baptism was after her dipping.'[277] The account of Goody Lacey's
experience is given in the form of question and answer:

     '_Q._ Goody Lacey! how many years since they were baptized? _A._ Three
     or four years ago, I suppose. _Q._ Who baptized them? _A._ The old
     serpent. _Q._ How did he do it? _A._ He dipped their heads in the
     water, saying, that they were his and that he had power over them.
     _Q._ Where was this? _A._ At Fall's River. _Q._ How many were baptized
     that day? _A._ Some of the chief; I think they were six baptized. _Q._
     Name them. _A._ I think they were of the higher powers.'[278]

A near approach to the ceremony of baptism is the blood-rite at Auldearne,
described by Isobel Gowdie and Janet Breadheid. The Devil marked Isobel on
the shoulder, 'and suked owt my blood at that mark, and spowted it in his
hand, and, sprinkling it on my head, said, "I baptise the, Janet, in my
awin name."' The Devil marked Janet Breadheid in the same way on the
shoulder, 'and suked out my blood with his mowth, at that place; he
spowted it in his hand, and sprinkled it on my head. He baptised me
thairvith in his awin nam, "Christian."'[279]

Though baptism is rare, the giving of a new name on admission is peculiar
to Scotland. The names seem to have been usually nicknames derived from
various sources; personal peculiarities such as 'Weill dancing Janet', or
'Able and stout'; contractions of the proper name, as 'Naip' for Barbara
Napier; or a title such as 'Rob the Rowar', for Robert Grierson, who kept
the rows or rolls. Most of the other names appear to have been ordinary
Christian names arbitrarily bestowed. There is nothing to throw any light
on the reason for the change. In 1590 at North Berwick the witch-name was
considered of the highest importance.

     'Robert Griersoune being namit, thay ran all hirdie-girdie and wer
     angrie; for it wes promesit, that he sould be callit "Ro^t the
     Comptroller alias Rob the Rowar" for expreming of his name.--Effie
     McCalzane, Robert Griersoune, and the said Barbara, hapnit to be
     nameit thair; quhilk offendit all the cumpany: And that they sould
     nocht haif bene nameit with thair awin names; Robert Griersoun, to
     haif bene callit _Rob the rowar_; Effie to be callit _Cane_; and the
     said Barbara, to be callit _Naip_.'[280]

Later, the change of name was of so little value that at Crook of Devon
several of the witches could not remember what they had been called; Bessie
Henderson appears to have recollected the name after a time, for it is
inserted towards the end of the confession; Robert Wilson could remember
the Devil's name but not his own: Agnes Brugh and Christian Grieve could
remember neither the Devil's nor their own.[281]

The so-called 'christening', i.e. naming, of animals, comes rather under
the head of 'sacrifice' than of baptism, for the ceremony appears to have
been purificatory.