3. _The Dances_

Dances as an important part of fertility rites are too well known to need
description. The witches' dances, taken in conjunction with the dates of
the four great Sabbaths of the year, point to the fact that they also were
intended to promote fertility. There were several forms of ritual dances,
varying apparently according to the form of fertility required, whether of
crops, animals, or human beings. The jumping dance seems to have had for
its object the growth of the crops; the higher the performers jumped the
higher the crops would grow. The so-called 'obscene' or 'indecent' dance
was for the promotion of fertility among animals and women. When the
dancers were disguised as animals, the dance was for the increase of the
animals represented; when undisguised, for the fertility of human beings.

Although the dances took place at English witch meetings, they are merely
mentioned and not described. The Scotch trials give rather fuller accounts,
but the chief details are from France.

The two principal forms of the dance were the ring-dance and the
follow-my-leader dance, but there was also a very complicated form which
was not understood by the Inquisitors, who therefore dismiss it with the
words 'tout est en confusion'. It still survives, however, in the
Basses-Pyrénées, in some of the very villages which were inhabited by
witches in the sixteenth century--those witches whose proceedings de
Lancre describes so vividly.[494]

The ring dances were usually round some object; sometimes a stone,
sometimes the Devil stood or was enthroned in the middle. Thomas Leyis,
with a great number of other witches, 'came to the Market and Fish Cross of
Aberdeen, under the conduct and guiding of the Devil present with you, all
in company, playing before you on his kind of instruments: Ye all danced
about both the said crosses, and the meal market, a long space of time; in
the which Devil's dance, thou the said Thomas was foremost and led the
ring, and dang the said Kathren Mitchell, because she spoiled your dance,
and ran not so fast about as the rest. Testified by the said Kathren
Mitchell, who was present with thee at the time forsaid dancing with the
Devil.'[495] Margaret Og was indicted for going to Craigleauch 'on Hallow
even last, and there, accompanied by thy own two daughters, and certain
others, your devilish adherents and companions, ye danced all together,
about a great stone, under the conduct of Satan, your master, a long
space'.[496] Jonet Lucas was accused of 'danceing in ane ring' on the same
occasion.[497] Beatrice Robbie was 'indited as a notorious witch, in
coming, under the conduct of the Devil thy master, with certain others, thy
devilish adherents, to Craigleauche, and there dancing altogether about a
great stone, a long space, and the Devil your master playing before
you'.[498] In the Basses-Pyrénées, 'Ils se mettent à dancer à l'entour
d'une pierre, qui est plantée audit lieu, sur laquelle est assis un grand
homme noir.'[499] Jane Bosdeau, who 'confessed freely and without Torture
and continued constant in it in the midst of the Flames in which she was
burnt', said that she had been to a witch-meeting, 'and danced in a circle
back to back'.[500]

     'Les Sorciers dansent, & font leurs danses en rond, doz contre doz.
     Les boiteux y vont plus dispostement que les autres [et] incitoient
     les autres à sauter & danser.[501] ... Quelquefois, mais rarement, ils
     dansent deux à deux, & par fois l'vn çà & l'autre là, & tousiours en
     confusion: estans telles danses semblables à celles des Fées, vrais
     Diables incorporez, qui regnoient il n'y a pas lõg temps.'[502] 'On y
     dance tousiours le dos tourné au centre de la dance, qui faict que les
     filles sont si accoutumées à porter les mains en arriere en cette dãce
     ronde, qu'elles y trainent tout le corps, & luy donnent vn ply courbé
     en arriere, ayant les bras à demy tournez: si bien que la plupart ont
     le ventre communement grand, enflé & avancé, & vn peu penchant sur le
     deuant. On y dance fort peu souuent vn à vn, c'est à dire vn homme
     seul auec vne femme ou fille.... On n'y dançoit que trois sortes de
     bransles, communement se tournant les espaules l'vn à l'autre, & le
     dos d'vn chascun visant dans le rond de la dance, & le visage en
     dehors. La premiere c'est à la Bohemienne.... La seconde c'est à
     sauts; ces deux sont en rond.'[503] 'Ils apperceurent à l'entrée [d'vn
     bois], vn rond, ou cerne, dans lequel il y auoit plusieurs vestiges de
     pieds d'ho[~m]es, d'èfans, & d'Ours, ou bien d'autres bestes
     semblables,[504] lesquels estoient seulement enfoncez d'vn demy doigt
     dans la neige, quoy que pour eux ils y entrassent iusques à la
     ceinture.'[505]

The Swedish witches danced in the same manner. 'We used to go to a gravel
pit which lay hard by a cross-way, and there we put on a garment over our
heads, and then danced round.'[506] The round dance was so essentially a
witch dance that More says, 'It might be here very seasonable to enquire
into the nature of those large _dark Rings_ in the grass, which they call
_Fairy Circles_, whether they be the _Rendezvouz_ of Witches, or the
dancing places of those little Puppet Spirits which they call _Elves_ or
_Fairies_.'[507]

It will be seen from the above quotations that there were many varieties in
the ring dance; this was the case also in the follow-my-leader dance. There
seems to have been also a combination of the two dances; or perhaps it
would be more correct to say that sometimes the ring and follow-my-leader
figures were used together so as to form one complete dance, as in the
modern Lancers. In both forms of the dance one of the chief members of the
society was the 'ring-leader', or leader of the dance. In the
follow-my-leader dance this was often the Devil, but in the ring dances
this place was usually taken by the second in command. When, however, the
Devil was the leader, the second-in-command was in the rear to keep up
those who could not move so quickly as the others. As pace was apparently
of importance, and as it seems to have been a punishable offence to lag
behind in the dance, this is possibly the origin of the expression 'The
Devil take the hindmost'.

At North Berwick Barbara Napier met her comrades at the church, 'where she
danced endlong the Kirk yard, and Gelie Duncan played on a trump, John
Fian, missellit, led the ring; Agnes Sampson and her daughters and all the
rest following the said Barbara, to the number of seven score of
persons.'[508] Isobel Gowdie was unfortunately not encouraged to describe
the dances in which she had taken part, so that our information, instead of
being full and precise, is very meagre. 'Jean Martein is Maiden to the
Coven that I am of; and her nickname is "Over the dyke with it", because
the Devil always takes the Maiden in his hand next him, when we dance
Gillatrypes; and when he would loup from [words broken here] he and she
will say, "Over the dyke with it."'[509] Another Scotch example is Mr.
Gideon Penman, who had been minister at Crighton. He usually 'was in the
rear in all their dances, and beat up all those that were slow'.[510]
Barton's wife 'one night going to a dancing upon Pentland Hills, he [the
Devil] went before us in the likeness of a rough tanny Dog, playing on a
pair of Pipes'.[511] De Lancre concludes his description of the dances (see
above, p. 131) by an account of an 'endlong' dance. 'La troisieme est aussi
le dos tourné, mais se tenant tous en long, & sans se deprendre des mains,
ils s'approchent de si près qu'ils se touchent, & se rencontrent dos à dos,
vn homme auec vne femme; & à certaine cadance ils se choquent & frapent
impudemment cul contre cul.'[512] It was perhaps this dance which the
Devil led: 'Le Diable voit parfois dancer simplement comme spectateur;
parfois il mene la dance, changeant souuent de main & se mettant à la main
de celles qui luy plaisent le plus.'[513] In Northumberland in 1673 'their
particular divell tooke them that did most evill, and danced with them
first.--The devill, in the forme of a little black man and black cloaths,
called of one Isabell Thompson, of Slealy, widdow, by name, and required of
her what service she had done him. She replyd she had gott power of the
body of one Margarett Teasdale. And after he had danced with her he
dismissed her, and call'd of one Thomasine, wife of Edward Watson, of
Slealy.'[514] Danaeus also notes that the Devil was the leader: 'Th[~e] fal
they to dauncing, wherin he leadeth the daunce, or els they hoppe and
daunce merely about him.'[515] This is perhaps what de Lancre means when he
says that 'apres la dance ils se mettent par fois à sauter'.[516] A curious
variation of the follow-my-leader dance was practised at Aberdeen on Rood
Day, a date which as I have shown elsewhere corresponds with the
Walpurgis-Nacht of the German witches. The meeting took place upon St.
Katherine's Hill, 'and there under the conduct of Satan, present with you,
playing before you, after his form, ye all danced a devilish dance, riding
on trees, by a long space.'[517]

Other variations are also given. 'The dance is strange, and wonderful, as
well as diabolical, for turning themselves back to back, they take one
another by the arms and raise each other from the ground, then shake their
heads to and fro like Anticks, and turn themselves as if they were
mad.'[518] Reginald Scot, quoting Bodin, says: 'At these magicall
assemblies, the witches neuer faile to danse; and in their danse they sing
these words, Har har, divell divell, danse here danse here, plaie here
plaie here, Sabbath sabbath. And whiles they sing and danse, euerie one
hath a broome in hir hand, and holdeth it vp aloft. Item he saith, that
these night-walking or rather night-dansing witches, brought out of
_Italie_ into _France_, that danse which is called _La Volta_.'[519] There
is also a description of one of the dances of the Italian witches: 'At Como
and Brescia a number of children from eight to twelve years of age, who had
frequented the Sabbat, and had been re-converted by the inquisitors, gave
exhibitions in which their skill showed that they had not been taught by
human art. The woman was held behind her partner and they danced backward,
and when they paid reverence to the presiding demon they bent themselves
backwards, lifting a foot in the air forwards.'[520]

In Lorraine the round dance always moved to the left. As the dancers faced
outwards, this would mean that they moved 'widdershins', i.e. against the
sun. 'Ferner, dass sie ihre Täntze in einem ronden Kreiss rings umbher
führen, und die Rücke zusammen gekehret haben, wie eine unter den dreyen
Gratiis pfleget fürgerissen zu werden, und also zusammen tanzen. Sybilla
Morelia sagt, dass der Reyhen allezeit auff der lincken Hand umbher
gehe.'[521]

One form of the witches' dance seems to survive among the children in the
Walloon districts of Belgium. It appears to be a mixture of the ordinary
round dance and the third of de Lancre's dances; for it has no central
personage, and the striking of back against back is a marked feature. 'Les
enfants font une ronde et répètent un couplet. Chaque fois, un joueur
désigné fait demi-tour sur place et se remet à tourner avec les autres en
faisant face à l'extérieur du cercle. Quand tous les joueurs sont
retournés, ils se rapprochent et se heurtent le dos en cadence.'[522]