V. THE RITES


1. _General_

The exact order of the ceremonies is never given and probably varied in
different localities, but the general rule of the ritual at the Sabbath
seems to have been that proceedings began by the worshippers paying homage
to the Devil, who sat or stood in a convenient place. The homage consisted
in renewing the vows of fidelity and obedience, in kissing the Devil on any
part of his person that he chose to indicate, and sometimes in turning a
certain number of times widdershins. Then followed the reports of all magic
worked since the previous Sabbath, either by individuals or at the Esbats,
and at the same time the witches consulted the Master as to their cases and
received instructions from him how to proceed; after which came admissions
to the society or marriages of the members. This ended the business part of
the meeting. Immediately after all the business was transacted, the
religious service was celebrated, the ceremonial of which varied according
to the season of the year; and it was followed by the 'obscene' fertility
rites. The whole ceremony ended with feasting and dancing, and the assembly
broke up at dawn.

This was apparently the usual course of the ritual of the Sabbath; the
Esbat had less ceremonial, and the religious service was not performed. The
Devil himself often went round and collected the congregation; and, not
being in his 'grand arroy', he appeared as a man in ordinary dress. Instead
of the religious service with the adoration of the god, the witches worked
the spells and charms with which they bewitched or unbewitched their
enemies and friends, or they exercised new methods which they learnt from
their Master, or received instructions how to practise the arts of healing
and secret poisoning, of causing and blasting fertility.

There are a few general accounts of the usual course of the Sabbath ritual.
Danaeus (1575) does not distinguish clearly between the two classes of
meetings, but at the same time he seems to have realized that a certain
order was followed:

     'Satan calleth them togither into a Diuelish Sinagoge, and that he may
     also vnderstand of them howe well and diligently they haue fulfilled
     their office of intoxicating committed vnto them, and whõ they haue
     slaine: wherefore they meete togither in certen apointed places....
     Wh[~e] they meete together he appeareth visibly vnto them in sundrie
     fourmes, as the head and chiefe of that congregation.... Then doe they
     all repeate the othe which they haue geuen vnto him, in acknowledging
     him to be their God, th[~e] fal they to dauncing.... Whiche beeing all
     finished, then he demaundeth agayne of them what they woulde require
     of him.... Vnto some he geueth poysons ready made, and others he
     teacheth howe to make and mingle new.... Finally, if in any thing they
     neede his presence and helpe, by couenant he promiseth to be present
     with them.'[465]

Boguet (1589) is more exact, as he obtained his knowledge at first hand:

     'Les Sorciers estans assemblez en leur Synagogue adorent premierement
     Satan ... ils luy offrent des chandelles, & le baisent aux parties
     honteuses de derriere. Quelquefois encor il tient vne image noire,
     qu'il faut baiser aux Sorciers.... Les Sorciers en second lieu
     dansent.... Les danses finies, les Sorciers viennent à s'accoupler....
     Les Sorciers, apres s'estre veautrez parmy les plaisirs immondes de la
     chair, banquettent & se festoient.... Les Sorciers rendent conte à
     Satan de ce qu'ils ont fait dés la derniere assemblée.... Il fait
     renoncer de nouueau à ces miserables, Dieu, Chresme, & Baptesme. Il
     leur fait rafraischir le serment solennel qu'ils ont fait.'[466]

The English account is put together from foreign sources to a great extent:

     'They are carryed out of the house, either by the Window, Door, or
     Chimney, mounted on their Imps.... Thus brought to the designed place,
     they find a great number of others arrived there by the same means:
     who, before Lucifer takes his place in his throne as King, do make
     their accustomed homage, Adoring, and Proclaiming him their Lord, and
     rendring him all Honour. This Solemnity being finished, they sit to
     Table where no delicate meats are wanting.... At the sound of many
     pleasant Instruments the table is taken away, and the pleasant consort
     invites them to a Ball.... At the last, the lights are put out. The
     Incubus's in the shapes of proper men satisfy the desires of the
     Witches, and the Succubus's serve for whores to the Wizards. At last
     before Aurora brings back the day, each one mounts on his spirit, and
     so returns to his respective dwelling place.... Sometimes at their
     solemn assemblies, the Devil commands, that each tell what wickedness
     he hath committed.... When the assembly is ready to break up, and the
     Devil to dispatch them, he publisheth this law with a loud voice,
     _Revenge your selves or else you shall dye_, then each one kissing the
     Posteriors of the Devil returns upon their aiery Vehicles to their
     habitations.'[467]