III. ADMISSION CEREMONIES


1. _General_

In the ceremonies for admission, as in all the other ceremonies of the
cult, the essentials are the same in every community and country, though
the details differ. The two points which are the essence of the ceremony
are invariable: the first, that the candidates must join of their own free
will and without compulsion; the second, that they devote themselves, body
and soul, to the Master and his service.

The ceremonies of admission differed also according to whether the
candidate were a child or an adult. The most complete record of the
admission of children comes from the Basses-Pyrénées in 1609:

     'Les Sorcieres luy offr[~e]t des petits enfans le genoüil en terre,
     lui disant auec vne soubmission, _Grand seigneur, lequel i'adore, ie
     vous ameine ce nouueau seruiteur, lequel veut estre perpetuellement
     vostre esclaue_: Et le Diable en signe de remerciement & gratification
     leur respond, _Approchez vous de moy_: à quoy obeissant, elles en se
     trainant à genouil, le luy presentent, & luy receuant l'enfant entre
     ses bras, le rend à la Sorciere, la remercie, & puis luy recommande
     d'en auoir soing, leur disant par ce moyen sa troupe s'augmentera. Que
     si les enfans ayans attainct l'aage de neuf ans, par malheur se voüent
     au Diable sans estre forcez ny violentez d'aucun Sorcier, ils se
     prosternent par terre deuant Satan: lequel iettant du feu par les
     yeux, leur dit, Que demandez vous, voulez vous estre à moy? ils
     respondent qu'ouy, il leur dict, Venez vous de vostre bonne volonté?
     ils respondent qu'ouy, Faictes donc ce que ie veux, & ce que ie fay.
     Et alors la grande maistresse & Royne du Sabbat qui leur sert de
     pedagogue, dict à ce nouueau qui se presente, qu'il die à haute voix,
     _Ie renie Dieu premierement, puis Iesus Christ son Fils, le S. Esprit,
     la vierge, les Saincts, la Saincte Croix, le Chresme, le Baptesme, &
     la Foy que ie tiens, mes Parrain & Marraine, & me remets de tout
     poinct en ton pouuoir & entre tes mains, ne recognois autre Dieu: si
     bien que tu es mon Dieu & ie suis ton esclaue_. Aprés on luy baille vn
     crapaud habillé auec son capot ou manteau, puis il commande qu'on
     l'adore; si bien qu'obeyssans & estants mis à genouil, ils baisent le
     Diable auprés de l'[oe]il gauche, à la poitrine, à la fesse, à la
     cuisse, & aux parties honteuses, puis leuant la queue ils luy baisent
     le derriere.'[221]

The novice was then marked by a scratch from a sharp instrument, but was
not admitted to the 'high mysteries' till about the age of twenty.[222] As
no further ceremonies are mentioned, it may be concluded that the
initiation into these mysteries was performed by degrees and without any
special rites.

At Lille, about the middle of the seventeenth century, Madame Bourignon
founded a home for girls of the lowest classes, 'pauvres et mal-originées,
la plus part si ignorantes au fait de leur salut qu'elles vivoient comme
des bêtes'.[223] After a few years, in 1661, she discovered that thirty-two
of these girls were worshippers of the Devil, and in the habit of going to
the Witches' Sabbaths. They 'had all contracted this Mischief before they
came into the House'.[224] One of these girls named Bellot, aged fifteen,
said 'that her Mother had taken her with her when she was very Young, and
had even carried her in her Arms to the Witches Sabbaths'.[225] Another
girl of twelve had been in the habit of going to the Sabbath since she also
was 'very Young'. As the girls seem to have been genuinely fond of Madame
Bourignon, she obtained a considerable amount of information from them.
They told her that all worshippers of the Devil 'are constrained to offer
him their Children. When a child thus offered to the Devil by its Parents,
comes to the use of Reason, the Devil then demands its Soul, and makes it
deny God and renounce Baptism, and all relating to the Faith, promising
Homage and Fealty to the Devil in manner of a Marriage, and instead of a
Ring, the Devil gives them a Mark with an iron awl [aleine de fer] in some
part of the Body.'[226]

It is also clear that Marguerite Montvoisin[227] in Paris had been
instructed in witchcraft from an early age; but as the trial in which she
figures was for the attempted poisoning of the king and not for witchcraft,
no ceremonies of initiation or admission are recorded.

In Great Britain the ceremonies for the reception of children are not given
in any detail, though it was generally acknowledged that the witches
dedicated their children to the Devil as soon as born; and from the
evidence it appears that in many cases the witches had belonged to that
religion all their lives. It was sometimes sufficient evidence against a
woman that her mother had been a witch,[228] as it presupposed that she had
been brought up as a worshipper of the Devil.

The Anderson children in Renfrewshire were all admitted to the society at
an early age.[229] Elizabeth Anderson was only seven when she was first
asked to swear fealty to the 'black grim Man.' James Lindsay was under
fourteen, and his little brother Thomas was still 'below pupillarity' at
the time of the trial, where he declared that he had been bribed, by the
promise of a red coat, to serve 'the Gentleman, whom he knew thereafter to
be the Devil'.[230] At Forfar in 1661, Jonet Howat was so young that when
Isabel Syrie 'presented hir to the divell, the divell said, What shall I do
with such a little bairn as she?' He accepted her, however, and she was
evidently the pet of the community, the Devil calling her 'his bonny
bird'.[231] At Paisley, Annabil Stuart was fourteen when, at her mother's
persuasion, she took the vows of fidelity to the Devil.[232]

Elizabeth Frances at Chelmsford (tried in 1556) was about twelve years old
when her grandmother first taught her the art of witchcraft.[233] Elizabeth
Demdike, the famous Lancashire witch, 'brought vp her owne Children,
instructed her Graund-children, and tooke great care and paines to bring
them to be Witches'.[234] One of her granddaughters, Jennet Device, was
aged nine at the time of the trial.

In Sweden the children were taken regularly to the assemblies,[235] and in
America[236] also a child-witch is recorded in the person of Sarah Carrier,
aged eight, who had made her vows two years before at her mother's
instigation.

The ceremony for the admission of adults who were converts to the witch
religion from Christianity follow certain main lines. These are (1) the
free consent of the candidate, (2) the explicit denial and rejection of a
previous religion, (3) the absolute and entire dedication of body and soul
to the service and commands of the new Master and God.

The ceremonies being more startling and dramatic for adults than for
children, they are recorded in Great Britain with the same careful detail
as in France, and it is possible to trace the local variations; although in
England, as is usual, the ceremonies had lost their significance to a far
greater extent than in Scotland, and are described more shortly, probably
because they were more curtailed.

The legal aspect of the admission ceremonies is well expressed by Sir
George Mackenzie, writing in 1699 on the Scotch laws relating to witchcraft
in the seventeenth century:

     'As to the relevancy of this Crime, the first Article useth to be
     _paction_ to serve the Devil, which is certainly relevant, _per se_,
     without any addition.... Paction with the Devil is divided by Lawyers,
     in _expressum_, _& tacitum_, an express and tacit Paction. Express
     Paction is performed either by a formal Promise given to the Devil
     then present, or by presenting a Supplication to him, or by giving the
     promise to a Proxie or Commissioner impowered by the Devil for that
     effect, which is used by some who dare not see himself. The _Formula_
     set down by _Delrio_, is, _I deny God Creator of Heaven and Earth, and
     I adhere to thee, and believe in thee_. But by the Journal Books it
     appears, that the ordinary Form of express Paction confest by our
     Witness, is a simple Promise to serve him. Tacit Paction is either
     when a person who hath made no express Paction, useth the Words or
     Signs which Sorcerers use, knowing them to be such.... Renouncing of
     Baptism is by _Delrio_ made an effect of Paction, yet with us it is
     relevant, _per se_ ... and the Solemnity confest by our Witches, is
     the putting one hand to the crown of the Head, and another to the
     sole of the Foot, renouncing their Baptism in that posture. _Delrio_
     tells us, that the Devil useth to Baptize them of new, and to wipe off
     their Brow the old Baptism: And our Witches confess always the giving
     them new Names.... The Devil's Mark useth to be a great Article with
     us, but it is not _per se_ found relevant, except it be confest by
     them, that they got that Mark with their own consent; _quo casu_, it
     is equivalent to a Paction. This Mark is given them, as is alledg'd,
     by a Nip in any part of the body, and it is blew.'[237]

Reginald Scot,[238] writing considerably earlier, gives a somewhat similar
account of the English witches, though couched in less legal phraseology:

     'The order of their bargaine or profession is double; the one solemne
     and publike; the other secret and priuate. That which is called
     solemne or publike, is where witches come togither at certeine
     assemblies, at the times prefixed, and doo not onelie see the diuell
     in visible forme; but confer and talke familiarlie with him. In which
     conference the diuell exhorteth them to obserue their fidelitie vnto
     him, promising them long life and prosperitie. Then the witches
     assembled, commend a new disciple (whom they call a nouice) vnto him:
     and if the diuell find that yoong witch apt and forward in
     renunciation of christian faith, in despising anie of the seuen
     sacraments, in treading upon crosses, in spetting at the time of
     eleuation, in breaking their fast on fasting daies, and fasting on
     sundaies; then the diuell giueth foorth his hand, and the nouice
     joining hand in hand with him, promiseth to obserue and keepe all the
     diuell's commandements. This done, the diuell beginneth to be more
     bold with hir, telling hir plainlie that all this will not serue his
     turne; and therefore requireth homage at hir hands: yea, he also
     telleth hir, that she must grant him both hir bodie and soule to be
     tormented in euerlasting fire: which she yeeldeth vnto. Then he
     chargeth hir, to procure as manie men, women, and children also, as
     she can, to enter into this societie.... Sometimes their homage with
     their oth and bargaine is receiued for a certeine terme of yeares;
     sometimes for euer. Sometimes it consisteth in the deniall of the
     whole faith, sometimes in part. The first is, when the soule is
     absolutelie yeelded to the diuell and hell-fier: the other is, when
     they haue but bargained not to obserue certeine ceremonies and
     statutes of the church; as to conceale faults at shrift, to fast on
     sundaies, etc. And this is doone either by oth, protestation of words,
     or by obligation in writing, sometimes sealed with wax, sometimes
     signed with bloud.'

Forbes says that

     'an express Covenant is entred into betwixt a Witch, and the Devil
     appearing in some visible Shape. Whereby the former renounceth God and
     his Baptism, engages to serve the Devil, and do all the Mischief he
     can as Occasion offers, and leaves Soul and Body to his Disposal after
     Death. The Devil on his part articles with such Proselytes, concerning
     the Shape he is to appear to them in, the Services they are to expect
     from him, upon the Performance of certain Charms or ceremonious Rites.
     This League is made verbally, if the Party cannot write. And such as
     can write, sign a written Covenant with their Blood.'[239]

The general order of the ceremony of admission can be gathered from the
evidence given at the trials, though no one trial gives the order in its
entirety. The ceremony might take place privately, at a local meeting, or
in full Sabbath; it was the same for either sex, except that the men were
not usually introduced, the women were sometimes introduced, sometimes not.
If there were any sort of introduction, it was by some one who was
acquainted with the candidate; usually the person who had induced her to
join. She was brought before the Devil, who asked her if she would be his
faithful servant, and if she would renounce her previous religion, and
dedicate herself to his service, taking him as her God. After the
renunciation and vows, the Devil baptized her in his own great name, and
among the Scotch witches gave her a new name by which she was known
afterwards at the Sabbaths and other meetings. The ceremony concluded by
giving the witch a mark or 'flesh-brand' on some part of the body.