 I.

     Compromise between the New and the Old Faiths--Witchcraft
     under the Early Church--The Sentiments of the Fathers and
     the Decrees of Councils--Platonic Influences--Historical,
     Physiological, and Accidental Causes of the Attribution of
     Witchcraft to the Female Sex--Opinions of the Fathers and
     other Writers--The Witch-Compact.


It might appear, in a casual or careless observation, surprising
that Christianity, whose original spirit, if not universal
practice, was to enlighten; whose professed mission was 'to
destroy the works of the devil,' failed to disprove as well as to
dispel some of the most pernicious beliefs of the pagan world:
that its final triumph within the limits of the Roman empire, or
as far as it extended without, was not attended by the extinction
of at least the most revolting practices of superstition.
Experience, and a more extended view of the progress of human
ideas, will teach that the growth of religious perception is
fitful and gradual: that the education of collective mankind
proceeds in the same way as that of the individual man. And thus,
in the expression of the biographer of Charles V., the barbarous
nations when converted to Christianity changed the object, not
the spirit, of their religious worship. Many of the ideas of the
old religion were consciously tolerated by the first propagators
of Christianity, who justly deemed that the new dogmas would be
more readily insinuated into the rude and simple minds of their
neophytes, if not too strictly uncompromising. Both past and
present facts testify to this compromise. It was a maxim with
some of the early promoters of the Christian cause, to do as
little violence as possible to existing prejudices[33]--a
judicious method still pursued by the Catholic, though condemned
by the Protestant, missionaries of the present day.[34] It was
not seldom that an entire nation was converted and christianised
by baptism almost in a single day: the mass of the people
accepting, or rather acquiescing in, the arguments of the
missionaries in submission to the will or example of their
prince, whose conduct they followed as they would have followed
him into the field. Such was the case at the conversion of the
Frankish chief Clovis, and of the Saxon Ethelbert. But if St.
Augustin or St. Boniface, and the earlier missionaries, had more
success in persuading the simple faith of the Germans, without a
written revelation and miracles, than the modern emissaries have
in inducing the Hindus to abandon their Vedas, it was easier to
convince them of the facts, than of the reason, of their faith.
Nor was it to be expected that such raw recruits (if the
expression may be allowed) should lay aside altogether prejudices
with which they were imbued from infancy.

  [33] The remark of a late Professor of Divinity in the
  University of Cambridge. 'The heathen temples,' says
  Professor Blunt, 'became Christian churches; the altars of
  the gods altars of the saints; the curtains, incense,
  tapers, and votive-tablets remained the same; the
  _aquaminarium_ was still the vessel for holy water; St.
  Peter stood at the gate instead of Cardea; St. Rocque or St.
  Sebastian in the bedroom instead of the Phrygian Penates;
  St. Nicholas was the sign of the vessel instead of Castor
  and Pollux; the Mater Deûm became the Madonna; alms pro
  Matre Deûm became alms for the Madonna; the festival of the
  Mater Deûm the festival of the Madonna, or _Lady Day_; the
  Hostia or victim was now the Host; the "Lugentes Campi," or
  dismal regions, Purgatory; the offerings to the Manes were
  masses for the dead.' The parallel, he ventures to assert,
  might be drawn out to a far greater extent, &c.

  [34] Conformably to this plan, the first proselytisers in
  Germany and the North were often reduced (we are told) to
  substituting the name of Christ and the saints for those of
  Odin and the gods in the toasts drunk at their bacchanalian
  festivals.

The extent of the credit and practice of witchcraft under the
Church triumphant is evident from the numerous decrees and
anathemas of the Church in council, which, while oftener treating
it as a dread reality, has sometimes ventured to contemn or to
affect to contemn it as imposture and delusion. Both the civil
and ecclesiastical laws were exceptionally severe towards
_goetic_ practices. 'In all those laws of the Christian
emperors,' says Bingham, 'which granted indulgences to criminals
at the Easter festival, the _venefici_ and the _malefici_, that
is, magical practices against the lives of men, are always
excepted as guilty of too heinous a crime to be comprised within
the general pardon granted to other offenders.'[35] In earlier
ecclesiastical history, successive councils or synods are much
concerned in fulminating against them. The council of Ancyra
(314) prohibits the art under the name of pharmacy: a few years'
penance being appointed for anyone receiving a magician into his
house. St. Basil's canons, more severe, appoint thirty years as
the necessary atonement. Divination by lots or by consulting
their sacred scriptures, just as afterwards they consulted
Virgil, seems to have been a very favourite mode of discovering
the future. The clergy encouraged and traded upon this kind of
divination: in the Gallican church it was notorious. 'Some
reckon,' the pious author of the 'Antiquities of the Christian
Church' informs us, 'St. Augustin's conversion owing to such a
sort of consultation; but the thought is a great mistake, and
very injurious to him, for his conversion was owing to a
providential call, like that of St. Paul, from heaven.' And that
eminent saint's confessions are quoted to prove that his
conversion from the depths of vice and licentiousness to the
austere sobriety of his new faith, was indebted to a legitimate
use of the scriptures. St. Chrysostom upbraids his cotemporaries
for exposing the faith, by their illegitimate inquiries, to the
scorn of the heathen, many of whom where wiser than to hearken to
any such fond impostures.

  [35] Bingham's _Origines Ecclesiasticæ_, xvi.

St. Augustin complains that Satan's instruments, professing the
exercise of these arts, were used to 'set the name of Christ
before their ligatures, and enchantments, and other devices, to
seduce Christians to take the venomous bait under the covert of a
sweet and honey potion, that the bitter might be hid under the
sweet, and make men drink it without discerning to their
destruction.' The heretics of the primitive, as well as of the
middle, ages were accused of working miracles, and propagating
their accursed doctrines by magical or infernal art. Tertullian,
and after him Eusebius, denounce the arch-heretic Simon Magus for
performing his spurious miracles in that way: and Irenæus had
declared of the heretic Marcus, that when he would consecrate the
eucharist in a cup of wine and water, by one of his juggling
tricks, he made it appear of a purple and red colour, as if by a
long prayer of invocation, that it might be thought the grace
from above distilled the blood into the cup by his invocation. A
correspondent of Cyprian, the celebrated African bishop,
describes a woman who pretended 'to be inspired by the Holy
Ghost, but was really acted on by a diabolical spirit, by which
she counterfeited ecstasies, and pretended to prophesy, and
wrought many wonderful and strange things, and boasted she would
cause the earth to move. Not that the devil [he is cautious to
affirm] has so great a power either to move the earth or shake
the elements by his command; but the wicked spirit, foreseeing
and understanding that there will be an earthquake, pretends to
do that which he foresees will shortly come to pass. And by these
lies and boastings, the devil subdued the minds of many to obey
and follow him whithersoever he would lead them. And he made that
woman walk barefoot through the snow in the depth of winter, and
feel no trouble nor harm by running about in that fashion. But at
last, after having played many such pranks, one of the exorcists
of the Church discovered her to be a cheat, and showed that to be
a wicked spirit which before was thought to be the Holy
Ghost.'[36]

  [36] _Origines Ecclesiasticæ_, xvi. The exorcists were a
  recognised and respectable order in the Church. See id. iii.
  for an account of the _Energumenoi_ or demoniacs. The lawyer
  Ulpian, in the time of Tertullian, mentions the Order of
  Exorcists as well known. St. Augustin (_De Civit. Dei_,
  xxii. 8) records some extraordinary cures on his own
  testimony within his diocess of Hippo.

Christian witchcraft was of a more tremendous nature than even
that of older times, both in its origin and practice. The devils
of Christianity were the metamorphosed deities of the old
religions. The Christian convert was convinced, and the Fathers
of the Church gravely insisted upon the fact, that the oracles of
Delphi or Dodona had been inspired in the times of ignorance and
idolatry by the great Enemy, who used the priest or priestess as
the means of accomplishing his eternal schemes of malice and
mischief. At the instant, however (so it was confidently
affirmed), of the divine incarnation the oracular temples were
closed for ever; and the demons were no longer permitted to
delude mankind by impersonating pagan deities. They must now find
some other means of effecting their fixed purpose. It was not far
to seek. There were human beings who, by a preeminently wicked
disposition, or in hope of some temporary profit, were prepared
to risk their future prospects, willing to devote both soul and
body to the service of hell. The 'Fathers' and great expounders
of Christianity, by their sentiments, their writings, and
their claims to the miraculous powers of exorcising, greatly
assisted to advance the common opinions. Justin Martyr, Origen,
Tertullian, Jerome, were convinced that they were in perpetual
conflict with the disappointed demons of the old world, who had
inspired the oracles and usurped the worship of the true God. Nor
was the contest always merely spiritual: they engaged personally
and corporeally. St. Jerome, like St. Dunstan in the tenth, or
Luther in the sixteenth century, had to fight with an incarnate
demon.

Exorcism--the magical or miraculous ejection of evil spirits by a
solemn form of adjuration--was a universal mode of asserting the
superior authority of the orthodox Church against the spurious
pretensions of heretics.[37]

  [37] The art of expelling demons, indeed, has been preserved
  in the Protestant section of the Christian Church until a
  recent age. The _exorcising_ power, it is remarkable, is the
  sole claim to miraculous privilege of the Protestants. The
  formula _de Strumosis Attrectandis_, or the form of touching
  for the king's evil (a similar claim), was one of the
  recognised offices of the English Established Church in the
  time of Queen Anne, or of George I.

Christian theology in the first age even was considerably indebted
to the Platonic doctrines as taught in the Alexandrian school; and
demonology in the third century received considerable accessions
from the speculations of Neo-Platonism, the reconciling medium
between Greek and Oriental philosophy. Philo-Judæus (whose
reconciling theories, displayed in his attempt to prove the
derivation of Greek religious or philosophical ideas from those
of Moses, have been ingeniously imitated by a crowd of modern
followers) had been the first to undertake to adapt the Jewish
theology to Greek philosophy. Plotinus and Porphyrius, the
founders of the new school of Platonism, introduced a large number
of angels or demons to the acquaintance of their Christian
fellow-subjects in the third century.[38] It has been remarked that
'such was the mild spirit of antiquity that the nations were less
attentive to the difference than to the resemblance of their
religious worship. The Greek, the Roman, and the barbarian, as
they met before their respective altars, easily persuaded themselves
that, under various names and with various ceremonies, they adored
the same deities.'[39] Magianism and Judaism, however, were little
imbued with the spirit of toleration; and the purer the form of
religious worship, the fiercer, too often, seems to be the
persecution of differing creeds. Christianity, with something of
the spirit of Judaism from which it sprung, was forced to believe
that the older religions must have sprung from a diabolic origin.
The whole pagan world was inspired and dominated by wicked
spirits. 'The pagans _deified_, the Christians _diabolised_,
Nature.'[40] It is in this fact that the entirely opposite
spirit of antique and mediæval thought, evident in the life,
literature, in the common ideas of ancient and mediæval Europe,
is discoverable.

  [38] 'The knowledge that is suited to our situation and
  powers, the whole compass of moral, natural, and
  mathematical science, was neglected by the new Platonists;
  whilst they exhausted their strength in the verbal disputes
  of metaphysics, they attempted to explore the secrets of the
  invisible world, and studied to reconcile Aristotle with
  Plato on subjects of which both these philosophers were as
  ignorant as the rest of mankind. Consuming their reason in
  those deep but unsubstantial meditations, their minds were
  exposed to illusions of fancy. They flattered themselves
  that they possessed the secret of disengaging the soul from
  its corporeal prison; claimed a familiar intercourse with
  demons and spirits; and by a very singular revolution,
  converted the study of philosophy into that of magic.'--_The
  Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire_, chap. xiii.

  [39] The Egyptians, almost the only exception to polytheistic
  tolerance, seem to have been rendered intolerant by the
  number of antagonistic animal-gods worshipped in different
  parts of the country, enumerated by Juvenal, who describes
  the effects of religious animosity displayed in a faction
  fight between Ombi or Coptos and Tentyra.--_Sat._ xv.

  [40] _Life of Goethe_, by G. H. Lewes.

The female sex has been always most concerned in the crime of
Christian witchcraft. What was the cause of this general
addiction, in the popular belief, of that sex, it is interesting
to inquire. In the East now, and in Greece of the age of
Simonides or Euripides, or at least in the Ionic States, women
are an inferior order of beings, not only on account of their
weaker natural faculties and social position, but also in respect
of their natural inclination to every sort of wickedness. And if
they did not act the part of a Christian witch, they were skilled
in the practice of toxicology. With the Latin race and many
European peoples, the female sex held a better position; and
it may appear inconsistent that in Christendom, where the
Goddess-Mother was almost the highest object of veneration, woman
should be degraded into a slave of Satan. By the northern nations
they were supposed to be gifted with supernatural power; and the
universal powers of the Italian hag have been already noticed.
But the Church, which allowed no miracle to be legitimate out of
the pale, and yet could not deny the fact of the miraculous
without, was obliged to assert it to be of diabolic origin. Thus
the _priestess_ of antiquity became a _witch_. This is the
historical account. Physically, the cause seems discoverable in
the fact that the natural constitution of women renders their
_imaginative_ organs more excitable for the ecstatic conditions
of the prophetic or necromantic arts. On all occasions of
religious or other cerebral excitement, women (it is a matter of
experience) are generally most easily reduced to the requisite
state for the expected supernatural visitation. Their hysterical
(_hystera_) natures are sufficiently indicative of the origin of
such hallucinations. Their magical or pharmaceutical attributes
might be derived from savage life, where the men are almost
exclusively occupied either in war or in the chase: everything
unconnected with these active or necessary pursuits is despised
as unbecoming the superior nature of the male sex. To the female
portion of the community are abandoned domestic employments,
preparation of food, the selection and mixture of medicinal
herbs, and all the mysteries of the medical art. How important
occupations like these, by ignorance and interest, might be
raised into something more than natural skill, is easy to be
conjectured. That so extraordinary an attribute would often be
abused is agreeable to experience.[41]

  [41] Quintilian declared, '_Latrocinium_ facilius in viro,
  _veneficium_ in feminâ credam.' To the same effect is an
  observation of Pliny: 'Scientiam feminarum in _veneficiis_
  prævalere.'

According to the earlier Christian writers, the frailer sex is
addicted to infernal practices by reason of their innate
wickedness: and in the opinion of the 'old Fathers' they are
fitted by a corrupt disposition to be the recipients and agents
of the devil's will upon earth. The authors of the _Witch-Hammer_
have supported their assertions of the proneness of women to evil
in general, and to sorcery in particular, by the respectable
names and authority of St. Chrysostom, Augustin, Dionysius
Areopagiticus, Hilary, &c. &c.[42] The Golden-mouthed is adduced
as especially hostile in his judgment of the sex; and his 'Homily
on Herodias' takes its proper place with the satires of
Aristophanes and Juvenal, of Boccaccio and Boileau.[43]

  [42]                               'They style a wife
       The dear-bought curse and lawful plague of life,
       A bosom-serpent and a domestic evil.'

  [43] The royal author of the _Demonologie_ finds no
  difficulty in accounting for the vastly larger proportion of
  the female sex devoted to the devil's service. 'The reason
  is easy,' he declares; 'for as that sex is frailer than man
  is, so is it easier to be entrapped in the gross snares of
  the devil, as was over-well proved to be true by the
  serpent's deceiving of Eva at the beginning, which makes him
  the homelier with that sex sensine:' and it is profoundly
  observed that witches cannot even shed tears, though women
  in general are, like the crocodile, ready to weep on every
  light occasion.

Reginald Scot gives the reasons alleged by the apologists of
witchcraft. 'This gift and natural influence of fascination
may be increased in man according to his affections and
perturbations, as through anger, fear, love, hate, &c. For by
hate, saith Varius, entereth a fiery inflammation into the eye of
man, which being violently sent out by beams and streams infect
and bewitch those bodies against whom they are opposed. And
therefore (he saith) that is the cause that women are oftener
found to be witches than men. For they have such an unbridled
force of fury and concupiscence naturally, that by no means is it
possible for them to temper or moderate the same. So as upon
every trifling occasion they, like unto the beasts, fix their
furious eyes upon the party whom they bewitch.... Women also
(saith he) are oftenlie filled full of superfluous humours, and
with them the melancholike blood boileth, whereof spring vapours,
and are carried up and conveyed through the nostrils and mouth,
to the bewitching of whatsoever it meeteth. For they belch up a
certain breath wherewith they bewitch whomsoever they list. And
of all other women lean, hollow-eyed, old, beetle-browed women
(saith he) are the most infectious.'[44] Why _old_ women are
selected as the most proper means of doing the devil's will may
be discovered in their peculiar characteristics. The repulsive
features, moroseness, avarice, malice, garrulity of his hags are
said to be appropriate instruments. Scot informs us, 'One sort of
such as are said to be witches are women which be commonly old,
lame, blear-eyed, pale, foul, and full of wrinkles, poor, sullen,
superstitious, and _papists_, or such as know no religion, in
whose drowsy minds the devil hath got a fine seat. They are lean
and deformed, showing melancholy in their faces, to the horror of
all that see them. They are doting, scolds, mad, devilish ...
neither obtaining for their service and pains, nor yet by their
art, nor yet at the devil's hands, with whom they are said to
make a perfect visible bargain, either beauty, money, promotion,
wealth, worship, pleasure, honour, knowledge, or any other
benefit whatsoever.' As to the preternatural gifts of these hags,
he sensibly argues: 'Alas! what an unapt instrument is a
toothless, old, impotent, unwieldy woman to fly in the air;
truly, the devil little needs such instruments to bring his
purposes to pass.'[45]

  [44] _Discoverie of Witchcraft_, book xii. 21.--We shall
  have occasion hereafter to notice this great opponent of the
  devil's regime in the sixteenth century. We may be inclined
  to consider a more probable reason--that spirits, being in
  the general belief (so Adam infers that God had 'peopled
  highest heaven with spirits masculine') of the masculine
  gender, the recipients of their inspiration are naturally of
  the other sex: evil spirits could propagate their human or
  half-human agents with least suspicion and in the most
  natural way.

  [45] _Discoverie_, i. 3, 6.--Old women, however, may be
  negatively useful. One of the writers on the subject (John
  Nider) recommends them to young men since '_Vetularum
  aspectus et colloquia amorem excutiunt_.'

Dr. Glanvil, who wrote in the latter half of the seventeenth
century, and is bitterly opposed to the 'Witch-Advocate' and his
followers, defends the capabilities of hags and the like for
serving the demons. He conjectures, 'Peradventure 'tis one of
the great designs, as 'tis certainly the interest, of those
wicked agents and machinators industriously to hide from us their
influences and ways of acting, and to work as near as 'tis
possible _incognito_; upon which supposal it is easy to conceive
a reason why they most commonly work by and upon the weak and the
ignorant, who can make no cunning observations or tell credible
tales to detect their artifice.'[46] The act of bewitching is
defined to be 'a supernatural work contrived between a corporal
old woman and a spiritual devil' ('Discoverie,' vi. 2). The
method of initiation is, according to a writer on the subject, as
follows: A decrepit, superannuated, old woman is tempted by a man
in black to sign a contract to become his, both soul and body. On
the conclusion of the agreement (about which there was much
cheating and haggling), he gives her a piece of money, and causes
her to write her name and make her mark on a slip of parchment
with her own blood. Sometimes on this occasion also the witch
uses the ceremony of putting one hand to the sole of her foot and
the other to the crown of her head. On departing he delivers to
her an imp or familiar. The familiar, in shape of a cat, a mole,
miller-fly, or some other insect or animal, at stated times of
the day sucks her blood through teats in different parts of her
body.[47] If, however, the proper vulgar witch is an old woman,
the younger and fairer of the sex were not by any means exempt
from the crime. Young and beautiful women, children of tender
years, have been committed to the rack and to the stake on the
same accusation which condemned the old and the ugly.

  [46] _Sadducismus Triumphatus_, part i. sect. 8.

  [47] _Grose's Antiquities_, in Brand's _Popular Antiquities
  of Great Britain_.




