VII. THE ORGANIZATION


The cult was organized in as careful a manner as any other religious
community; each district however was independent, and therefore Mather is
justified in saying that the witches 'form themselves after the manner of
Congregational Churches'.[735]


1. _The Officer_

The Chief or supreme Head of each district was known to the recorders as
the 'Devil'. Below him in each district, one or more officers--according to
the size of the district--were appointed by the chief. The officers might
be either men or women; their duties were to arrange for meetings, to send
out notices, to keep the record of work done, to transact the business of
the community, and to present new members. Evidently these persons also
noted any likely convert, and either themselves entered into negotiations
or reported to the Chief, who then took action as opportunity served. At
the Esbats the officer appears to have taken command in the absence of the
Grand Master; at the Sabbaths the officers were merely heads of their own
Covens, and were known as Devils or Spirits, though recognized as greatly
inferior to the Chief. The principal officer acted as clerk at the Sabbath
and entered the witches' reports in his book; if he were a priest or
ordained minister, he often performed part of the religious service; but
the Devil himself always celebrated the mass or sacrament. In the absence
of all direct information on the subject, it seems likely that the man who
acted as principal officer became Grand Master on the death of the previous
Chief. Occasionally the Devil appointed a personal attendant for himself,
who waited upon him on all solemn occasions, but does not appear to have
held any official position in the community.

Estebene de Cambrue (1567) said that 'elle a veu au Sabbat vn Notaire
qu'elle nomme, lequel a accoustumé de leuer les defauts de celles qui ont
manqué de se trouuer au Sabbat.'[736] At the North Berwick meetings (1590),
there were several officers, of whom Fian was the chief.

     'Robert Griersoun being namit, they all ran hirdie-girdie and wer
     angrie: for it wes promisit he sould be callit "Ro^t the Comptroller,
     alias Rob the Rowar," for expreming of his name.--Johnne Fiene wes
     ewer nerrest to the Devill, att his left elbok; Gray Meill kepit the
     dur.--The accusation of the saide Geillis Duncane aforesaide, who
     confessed he [Fian] was their Regester, and that there was not one man
     suffered to come to the Divels readinges but onelie hee.--[Fian's
     confession] That at the generall meetinges of those witches, he was
     always present; that he was clarke to all those that were in
     subiection to the Divels service, bearing the name of witches; that
     alway hee did take their oathes for their true service to the Divell;
     and that he wrote for them such matters as the Divell still pleased to
     commaund him.'[737]

Elizabeth Southerns, otherwise known as old Mother Demdike (1613), 'was
generall agent for the Deuill in all these partes'.[738] The 'eminent
warlok' Robert Grieve of Lauder (1649) 'was brought to a Confession of his
being the _Devils Officer_ in that Countrey for warning all Satans Vassals
to come to the Meetings, where, and whensoever the Devil required.... The
Devil gave him that charge, to be his Officer to warn all to the meetings;
(as was said before,) in which charge he continued for the space of
eighteen years and more.'[739] The evidence concerning Isobel Shyrie at
Forfar (1661) is too long to quote, but it is clear that she acted as the
officer.[740] Isobel Gowdie (1662) says definitely, 'Johne Young, in
Mebestowne, is Officer to owr Coeven', and remarks in another part of her
confession that 'Johne Yownge in Mebestowne, owr Officer, did drywe the
plewghe'.[741] The only indication of a change of personnel is given by
Janet Breadheid, of the same Coven as Isobel Gowdie.

     'Johne Taylor, my husband, was then Officer, bot Johne Young in
     Mebestoune, is now Officer to my Coeven. Quhan I cam first ther, the
     Divell called tham all be thair names, on the book; and my husband,
     than called thame at the door.... Whan we haid Great Meittingis,
     Walter Ledy, in Penick, my husband, and Alexander Elder, nixt to the
     Divell, wer Ruleris; and quhan ther wold be but fewar, I my self, the
     deceassit Jean Suthirland, Bessie Hay, Bessie Wilsone, and Janet
     Burnet wold rule thaim.'[742]

In Somerset (1664) Anne Bishop appears to have been the chief personage
under the Devil, in other words the Officer.[743] At Paisley (1678) Bessie
Weir 'was Officer to their several meetings.--Bessie Weir did intimate to
him [John Stewart], that there was a meeting to be at his house the next
day: And that the Devil under the shape of a black man, Margaret Jackson,
Margery Craige, and the said Bessie Weir, were to be present. And that the
said Bessie Weir required the Declarant to be there, which he
promised.'[744] In New England (1692) it appears that both Bridget Bishop
and Martha Carrier held high rank, and were probably Officers.

One duty seems to have been delegated to a particular individual, who might
perhaps hold no other office, or who might, on the other hand, be the chief
official; this was the manager, often the leader, of the dance. As pace
seems to have been an essential in the dance, the leader was necessarily
active and generally young. At North Berwick (1590) 'John Fein mussiled led
the ring'.[745] In Aberdeen (1596) Thomas Leyis was the chief person in the
dance; 'thow the said Thomas was formest and led the ring, and dang the
said Kathren Mitchell, becaus scho spillet your dans, and ran nocht so fast
about as the rest.'[746] Isobel Cockie of the same Coven was next in
importance; 'in the quhilk danse, thow was the ring leader nixt Thomas
Leyis.'[747] Mr. Gideon Penman (1678), who had once been minister at
Crighton, went to the Sabbaths, where the Devil spoke of him as 'Mr.
Gideon, my chaplain'.[748] The witches said that 'ordinarily Mr. Gideon
was in the rear in all their dances, and beat up those that were slow'.
This Mr. Gideon seems to be the same person as the 'warlock who formerly
had been admitted to the ministrie in the Presbyterian times, and now he
turnes a preacher under the devill.--This villan was assisting to Satan in
this action' [giving the sacrament] 'and in preaching.'[749]

The personal attendant of the Devil is rare. At Aberdeen (1596) Issobell
Richie was accused that 'at that tyme thow ressauit thy honours fra the
Dewyll, thy maister, and wer appoynted be him in all tymes thairefter, his
speciall domestick servand and furriour'.[750] John McWilliam Sclater
(1656) was appointed cloak-bearer to the Devil.[751]

The Devil's piper was also an official appointment in Scotland, but does
not occur elsewhere. John Douglas of Tranent (1659) was the Devil's
piper,[752] and so also was a man mentioned by Sinclair: 'A reverend
Minister told me, that one who was the Devils Piper, a wizzard confest to
him, that at a Ball of dancing, the Foul Spirit taught him a Baudy song to
sing and play.'[753]

The Queen of the Sabbath may perhaps be considered as an official during
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, though in early times she was
probably the chief personage in the cult, as Pearson has pointed out.[754]
It is not unlikely that she was originally the same as the Queen of
Elfhame; in Scotland, however, in the seventeenth century, there is a
Maiden of the Coven, which was an important position in the Esbat but
entirely distinct from the Queen of Faery, while in other places a woman,
not the Queen, is often the officer and holds the highest place after the
Grand Master.

Elizabeth Stile of Windsor (1579) said that 'mother Seidre dwelling in the
Almeshouse, was the maistres Witche of all the reste'.[755] Marion Grant of
Aberdeen (1597) confessed that 'the Devill thy maister causit the dans
sindrie tymes with him and with Our Ladye, quha, as thow sayes, was a fine
woman, cled in a quhyte walicot'.[756] In France (1609) the custom seems
to have been universal, 'en chasque village trouuer vne Royne du Sabbat',
who sat at the Devil's left hand during the celebration of the mass and
received the offerings of the faithful.[757] The witches called her both
the Grande Maîtresse and the Reine du Sabbat.[758] Isobel Gowdie's
confession (1662) shows that the Queen of Elthame was not the same as the
chief woman of the Coven, for she saw the Queen only on going into the
fairy-howe, while the Maiden of the Coven was at each meeting. 'We doe no
great mater without owr Maiden.--Quhan we ar at meat, or in any vther place
quhateuir, the Maiden of each Coven sittis abow the rest, nixt the
Divell.'[759] In New England (1692) Deliverance Hobbs confessed that 'the
said G. B. preached to them, and such a woman was their Deacon'.[760]