VIII. FAMILIARS AND TRANSFORMATIONS


The question of familiars is one which has always puzzled the student of
witch-trials, and almost more than any other has been the cause of the
belief that hysteria and hallucination were the foundation of the witches'
confessions. Yet when the accounts are carefully examined, the
circumstantial detail given in the evidence shows that here, as elsewhere,
a foundation of fact underlies the statements of the accused. These
statements are often misunderstood and therefore misrepresented by the
recorders, and still more so by the modern commentator, but by comparison
of the details a considerable amount of information can be gained.

The familiars can be divided into two types: (1) those by which the witch
divined, (2) those who attended on the witch to obey her commands.


1. _The Divining Familiar_

The essence of this familiar is that it did not belong to the witch but was
an animal which appeared accidentally after the performance of certain
magical ceremonies. Forbes puts this quite clearly when describing the
contract: 'The Devil on his Part articles with such Proselytes, concerning
the Shape he is to appear to them in, the Services they are to expect from
him, upon the Performance of certain Charms or ceremonious Rites.'[831]
From this statement and from the facts revealed in the trials it would seem
that the Devil appointed to the witch, on her admission, some kind of
animal or animals by which she should divine, and which therefore
represented himself for the time being, for he claimed the power, as God,
to know and reveal the future. This explanation accounts for the fact that
the witches always spoke of such animals as the Devil and believed that
they could foretell the future by his means. The actual method of
divination is not preserved; all that remains of the ceremony are the
words and gestures which were used before the appearance of the animal, and
these only in few cases. The method was probably such as obtained in other
places where auguries by animals and birds were practised, i.e. by the
direction and pace of the animal, by its actions, by its voice if it
emitted any sound, and so on. The method of making such observations and of
translating them when made was part of the instruction given to the witch
by the Devil; and was usually employed to discover whether a person were
bewitched, the ultimate result of an illness, and the length of life of any
given person.

In 1566 John Walsh, of Netherberry in Dorset, who 'knoweth when anye man is
bewytched, sayth vpon his oth, that his Familiar would sometyme come vnto
hym lyke a gray blackish Culuer, and somtime like a brended Dog, and
somtimes lyke a man.'[832] In 1590 Agnes Sampson, the 'wise wife' of Keith,
was--

     'fylit and convict, that the Dewill apperit to hir in liknes of ane
     dog, att quhom she socht her haill responsis that quhene sche wes send
     for to haill the auld Lady Edmestoune, quhene sche lay seik, befoir
     the said Agnes departit, sche tauld to the gentilwemene, that sche
     sould tell thame that nycht quhidder the Lady wald haill or nocht; and
     appointit thame to be in the gardin efter supper, betuix fyve and sax
     att ewin. Sche passit to the gairdene, to devyise vpoun hir prayer,
     one quhat tyme sche chargeit the Dewill, calling him "Elva", to cum
     and speik to hir, quha come in owir the dyke, in liknes of ane dog,
     and come sa neir to hir, that sche wes effrayit, and chargeit him "on
     the law that he lewit on", to cum na neirar, bot to ansuer hir; and
     sche demandit, Quhidder the lady wald leif or nocht. He said, "Hir
     dayes war gane." Than he demandit, "Gif the gentilwemen hir dochteres,
     quhair thay wer?" And sche said, that "the gentilwemen said, that thay
     war to be thair". He ansuerit, "Ane of thame sould be in perrell, and
     that he sould haif ane of thame." Sche ansuerit, "It sould nocht be
     sa", and swa departit fra hir zowling. Fra this tyme quhill eftir
     supper, he remanit in the wall [well]. Quhen the gentilwemen come in,
     the dog come out of the wall, and apperit to thame; quhairatt thay wer
     effrayit. In the mene tyme, ane of the said gentilwemen, the Lady
     Torsenze, ran to the wall, being forceit and drawin by the Devill,
     quha wald haif drownit hir, war nocht the said Agnes and the rest of
     the gentilwemen gatt ane gryp of hir, and with all hir [their?]
     forceis drew hir abak agane, quhilk maid thame all effrayd. The dog
     passit away thaireftir with ane zowle.'[833]

Margerat Clarke, like Agnes Sampson a midwife of great reputation, was
tried at Aberdeen in 1597 for witchcraft, in that, being sent for to a case

     'and ane Androw Mar cuming for the, the Devill thy maister, quhome
     thow seruis, and quha techis the all this vytchcraft and sorcerie,
     apperit to the, in the licknes of ane horss, in ane how and den, and
     spak and conferrit with the a lang speace.--[Being sent for to another
     case] and the said guidman of Kincragie sendand his awin best horss,
     with ane boy of his awin, to bring the to his wyiff; and the said boy
     on horse cuming to the, and thow beand on the horss behind the boy,
     att thy awin dure, thy maister Satane, the Dewill, apperit in the
     licknes of ane gray staig, and convoyit the and the boy fra thy awin
     houss to Kincragie, and keipit cumpanie all the way with you, with
     quhome thow haid thy secreitt conference.--Vpone Nwris [New-year's]
     day, thow was att the loche syid besyid Boigloche, and thair thow
     pudlit be ane lang speace, thy selff alane, in ane deip holl amongis
     the watter, castand watter, erd and stone oure thi schowlderis, and
     thair was besyid the thy maister the Deuill, quhome thow seruis, in
     the licknes of ane hen flichtering, with quhome thow was thane
     consultand, and quhais directiounis than thow was taikand.'[834]

In Derbyshire in 1597, 'Whereas Alice Gooderige said her familiar was like
one William Gregories dog of Stapenhill, there arose a rumor, his dog was
her familiar: Wherefore hee with his neighbour maister Coxe went the next
day to examin her concerning this report; and she saide, my diuel (I say)
was like your dog. Now out vpon thee (saide Gregorie) and departed: she
being further examined, saide she had her familiar of her mother.'[835]
Alexander Hamilton, tried at Edinburgh in 1630, confessed that--

     'haifing ane battoun of fir in his hand the devill than gave the said
     Alexr command to tak that battoun quhan evir he had ado with him and
     thairwt to strek thruse upone the ground and to nhairge him to ruse up
     foule theiff Conforme to the whilk directioun and be streking of the
     said battone thryse upone the ground the devill was in use sumtymes to
     appeir to the said Alexr in the liknes of ane corbie at uther tymes in
     the schape of ane katt and at uther tymes in the schape of ane dog and
     thereby the said Alexr did ressave reponsis frome him.--The said Alexr
     Hamiltoun coming to the said Thomas Homes house and seing him visseit
     with the said seiknes declairit to him that he was bewitchet and
     promeist to cure him thereof Lykas for this effect the said Alexr
     schortlie thereftir past to clarkingtoun burne besyde the rottoneraw
     haifing ane katt under his okister and thair wt his said battoun
     raisit Sathan his maister quha than appeirit to him in the liknes of
     ane corbie and thair instructit him be quhat meanis he sould cure the
     said Thomas of his said seiknes and he haifing ressauit that respons
     fra the devill the said Alexr thereftir cuist to him the kat quha
     therewt vanischet away'.[836]

Two of the Somerset witches in 1664 had familiars; to Elizabeth Style the
familiar came as a black dog, 'and when she hath a desire to do harm, she
calls the Spirit by the name of _Robin_, to whom when he appeareth, she
useth these words, _O Sathan give me my purpose_. She then tells him what
she would have done. And that he should so appear to her was part of her
Contract with him.--Alice Duke saith, that when the Devil doth any thing
for her, she calls for him by the name of _Robin_, upon which he appears,
and when in the shape of a Man, she can hear him speak'.[837] This shows
that the familiar, or Devil as she called him, was not always in the form
of a man. The trial of Margaret Nin-Gilbert at Thurso was as late as 1719:
'Being interrogat, If ever the devil appeared afterwards to her? Confessed,
That sometimes he appeared in the likeness of a great black horse, and
other times riding on a black horse, and that he appeared sometimes in the
likeness of a black cloud, and sometimes like a black henn'.[838]