2. _Rain-making_

The rain-making powers of the witches have hardly been noted by writers on
the subject, for by the time the records were made the witches were
credited with the blasting of fertility rather than its increase. Yet from
what remains it is evident that the original meaning of much of the ritual
was for the production of fertilizing rain, though both judges and
witnesses believed that it was for storms and hail.

One of the earliest accounts of such powers is given in the story quoted by
Reginald Scot from the _Malleus Maleficarum_, written in 1487, a century
before Scot's own book:

     'A little girle walking abroad with hir father in his land, heard him
     complaine of drought, wishing for raine, etc. Whie father (quoth the
     child) I can make it raine or haile, when and where I list: He asked
     where she learned it. She said, of hir mother, who forbad hir to tell
     anie bodie thereof. He asked hir how hir mother taught hir? She
     answered, that hir mother committed hir to a maister, who would at
     anie time doo anie thing for hir. Whie then (said he) make it raine
     but onlie in my field. And so she went to the streame, and threw vp
     water in hir maisters name, and made it raine presentlie. And
     proceeding further with hir father, she made it haile in another
     field, at hir father's request. Herevpon he accused his wife, and
     caused hir to be burned; and then he new christened his child
     againe.'[671]

Scot also gives 'certaine impossible actions' of witches when he ridicules
the belief

     'that the elements are obedient to witches, and at their commandement;
     or that they may at their pleasure send raine, haile, tempests,
     thunder, lightening; when she being but an old doting woman, casteth a
     flint stone ouer hir left shoulder, towards the west, or hurleth a
     little sea sand vp into the element, or wetteth a broome sprig in
     water, and sprinkleth the same in the aire; or diggeth a pit in the
     earth, and putting water therein, stirreth it about with hir finger;
     or boileth hogs bristles; or laieth sticks acrosse vpon a banke, where
     neuer a drop of water is; or burieth sage till it be rotten; all which
     things are confessed by witches, and affirmed by writers to be the
     meanes that witches vse to mooue extraordinarie tempests and
     raine'.[672]

More quotes Wierus to the same effect: 'Casting of Flint-Stones behind
their backs towards the West, or flinging a little Sand in the Air, or
striking a River with a Broom, and so sprinkling the Wet of it toward
Heaven, the stirring of Urine or Water with their finger in a Hole in the
ground, or boyling of Hogs Bristles in a Pot.'[673]

The throwing of stones as a fertility rite is found in the trial of Jonet
Wischert, one of the chief witches at Aberdeen, and is there combined with
a nudity rite. 'In hervest last bypast, Mr. William Rayes huikes [saw thee
at] the heid of thi awin gudmannis croft, and saw the tak all thi claiss
about thi heid, and thow beand naikit from the middill down, tuik ane gryte
number of steynis, and thi self gangand baklenis, keist ane pairt behind
the our thi heid, and ane wther pairt fordward.'[674]