CHAPTER III.

     Witchcraft and Heresy purposely confounded by the
     Church--Mediæval Science closely connected with Magic and
     Sorcery--Ignorance of Physiology the Cause of many of the
     Popular Prejudices--Jeanne d'Arc--Duchess of
     Gloucester--Jane Shore--Persecution at Arras.


What can hardly fail to be discerned in these prosecutions is the
confusion of heresy and sorcery industriously created by the
orthodox Church to secure the punishment of her offending
dissentients. There are few proceedings against the pretended
criminals in which it is not discoverable; the one crime being,
as a matter of course, the necessary consequence of the other. In
the interest of the Church as much as in the credulity of the
people must be sought the main cause of so violent an epidemic,
of so fearful a phenomenon in its continuance and atrocities, a
fact demonstrated by the whole course of the superstition in the
old times of Catholicism. Materials for exciting animosity and
indignation against suspected heretics were near at hand. In
the assurance of the pre-scientific world everything remote
from ordinary knowledge or experience was inseparable from
supernaturalism. What surpassed the limits of a very feeble
understanding, what was beyond the commonest experience of
every-day life, was with one accord relegated to the domain of
the supernatural, or rather to that of the devil. For what was
not done or taught by Holy Church must be of 'that wicked
One'--the cunning imitator.

In the twelfth century the Church was alarmed by the simultaneous
springing up of various sects, which, if too hastily claimed by
Protestantism as _Protestants_, in the modern sense, against
Catholic theology, were yet sufficiently hostile or dangerous to
engage the attention and to provoke the enmity of the pontiffs.
The fate of the Stedingers and others in Germany, of the
Paulicians in Northern France; of the Albigenses and Waldenses in
Southern Europe, is in accordance with this successful sort of
theological tactics. Many of the articles of indictment against
those outlaws of the Church and of society are extracted from the
primitive heresies, in particular from the doctrines of the
anti-Judaic and _spiritualising_ Gnostics, and their more than
fifty subdivided sects--Marcionites, Manicheans, &c. Gregory IV.
issued a bull in 1232 against the Stedingers, revolted from the
rule of the Archbishop of Bremen, where they are declared to be
accustomed to scorn the sacraments, hold communion with devils,
make representative images of wax, and consult with witches.[64]

  [64] A second bull enters into details. On the reception of
  a convert, a toad made its appearance, which was adored by
  the assembled crowd. On sitting down to the banquet a black
  cat comes upon the stage, double the size of an ordinary
  dog, advancing backwards with up-turned tail. The neophytes,
  one after another, kissed this feline demon, with due
  solemnity, on the back. Walter Mapes has given an account of
  the similar ceremonies of the _Publicans_ (Paulicians).
  Heretical worship was of a most licentious as well as
  disgusting kind. The religious meetings terminate always in
  indiscriminate debauchery.

Alchymy, astrology, and kindred arts were closely allied to the
practice of witchcraft: the profession of medicine was little
better than the mixing of magical ointments, love-potions,
elixirs, not always of an innocent sort; and Sangrados were not
wanting in those days to trade upon the ignorance of their
patients.[65] Nor, unfortunately, are the genuine seekers after
truth who honestly applied to the study of nature exempt from the
charge of often an unconscious fraud. Monstrous notions mingled
with the more real results of their meritorious labours. Science
was in its infancy, or rather was still struggling to be freed
from the oppressive weight of speculative and theological
nonsense before emerging into existence. Many of the fancied
phenomena of witch-cases, like other physical or mental
eccentricities, have been explained by the progress of reason and
knowledge. Lycanthropy (the transformation of human beings into
wolves by sorcery), with the no less irrational belief in
demoniacal possession, the product of a diseased imagination and
brain, was one of the many results of mere ignorance of
physiology. In the seventeenth century lycanthropy was gravely
defended by doctors of medicine as well as of divinity, on the
authority of the story of Nebuchadnezzar, which proved undeniably
the possibility of such metamorphoses.

  [65] Pliny (_Hist. Natur._ xxx.) 'observes,' as Gibbon
  quotes him, 'that magic held mankind by the triple chain of
  religion, of physic, and of astronomy.'

Cotemporary annalists record the extraordinary frenzy aggravated,
as it was, by the proceedings against the Templars, the signal of
witch persecutions throughout France. The historian of France
draws a frightful picture of the insecure condition of an
ignorantly prejudiced society. Accusations poured in; poisonings,
adulteries, forgeries, and, above all, charges of witchcraft,
which, indeed, entered as an ingredient into all causes, forming
their attraction and their horror. The judge shuddered on the
judgment seat when the proofs were brought before him in the
shape of philtres, amulets, frogs, black cats, and waxen images
stuck full of needles. Violent curiosity was blended at these
trials with the fierce joy of vengeance and a cast of fear. The
public mind could not be satiated with them: the more there were
burnt, the more there were brought to be burnt.[66] In 1398 the
Sorbonne, at the chancellor's suggestion, published 27 articles
against all sorts of sorcery, pictures of demons, and waxen
figures. Six years later a synod was specially convened at
Langres, and the pressing evil was anxiously deliberated at the
Council of Constance.

  [66] Michelet, whose poetic-prose may appear hardly suitable
  to the philosophic dignity of history, relating the fate of
  two knights accused with a monk of having 'sinned' with the
  king's daughter-in-law 'even on the holiest days,' and who
  were castrated and flayed alive, truly enough infers that
  'the pious confidence of the middle age which did not
  mistrust the immuring of a great lady along with her knights
  in the precincts of a castle, of a narrow tower; the
  vassalage which imposed on young men as a feudal duty the
  sweetest cares, was a dangerous trial to human nature.'

Conspicuous about this period, by their importance and iniquity,
are the cases of the Pucelle d'Orléans and the catastrophe of
Arras. Incited (it is a modern conviction) by a noble enthusiasm,
by her own ardent imagination, the Pucelle divested herself of
the natural modesty of her sex for the dress and arms of a
warrior; and 'her inexperienced mind, working day and night on
the favourite object, mistook the impulses of passion for
heavenly inspiration.' Reviewing the last scenes in the life of
that patriotic shepherdess, we hesitate whether to stigmatise
more the unscrupulous policy of the English authorities or the
base subservience of the Parliament of Paris. The English Regent
and the Cardinal of Winchester, unable to allege against their
prisoner (the saviour of her country, taken prisoner in a sally
from a besieged town, had been handed over by her countrymen to
the foreigner) any civil crime, were forced to disguise a
violation of justice and humanity in the pretence of religion;
and the Bishop of Beauvais presented a petition against her, as
an ecclesiastical subject, demanding to have her tried by an
ecclesiastical court for sorcery, impiety, idolatry, and magic.
The University of Paris acquiesced. Before this tribunal the
accused was brought, loaded with chains, and clothed in her
military dress. It was alleged that she had carried about a
standard consecrated by magical enchantments; that she had been
in the habit of attending at the witches' sabbath at a fountain
near the oak of Boulaincourt; that the demons had discovered to
her a magical sword consecrated in the Church of St. Catherine,
to which she owed her victories; that by means of sorcery she had
gained the confidence of Charles VIII. Jeanne d'Arc was convicted
of all these crimes, aggravated by _heresy_: her revelations were
declared to be inventions of the devil to delude the people.[67]

  [67] Shakspeare brings the fiends upon the stage: their work
  is done, and they now abandon the enchantress. In vain La
  Pucelle invokes in her extremity--

              'Ye familiar spirits, that are cull'd
        Out of the powerful regions under earth,
        Help me this once, that France may get the field.
        Oh, hold me not with silence over-long!

       'Where I was wont to feed you with my blood,
        I'll lop a member off, and give it you,
        In earnest of a further benefit;
        So you do condescend to help me now.

        *       *       *       *       *

        Cannot my body, nor blood-sacrifice,
        Entreat you to your wonted furtherance?
        Then take my soul; my body, soul, and all,
        Before that England give the French the foil.
        See! they forsake me.

        *       *       *       *       *

        My ancient incantations are too weak
        And hell too strong for me to buckle with.'

  But a worthier, if contradictory, origin is assigned for her
  enthusiasm when she replies to the foul aspersion of her
  taunting captors--

       'Virtuous, and holy; chosen from above,
        By inspiration of celestial grace,
        To work exceeding miracles on earth,
        I never had to do with wicked spirits.
        But you--that are polluted with your lusts,
        Stain'd with the guiltless blood of innocents,
        Corrupt and tainted with a thousand vices--
        Because you want the grace that others have,
        You judge it straight a thing impossible
        To compass wonders, but by help of devils.'

Her ecclesiastical judges then consigned their prisoner to the
civil power; and, finally, in the words of Hume, 'this admirable
heroine--to whom the more generous superstition of the ancients
would have erected altars--was, on pretence of heresy and magic,
delivered over alive to the flames; and expiated by that dreadful
punishment the signal services she had rendered to her prince and
to her native country.'[68]

  [68] _History of England_, XX. Shakspeare (_Henry VI._ part
  ii. act i.) has furnished us with the charms and
  incantations employed about the same time in the case of the
  Duchess of Gloucester. Mother Jourdain is the representative
  witch-hag.

Without detracting from the real merit of the patriotic martyr,
it might be suspected that, besides her inflamed imagination, a
pious and pardonable collusion was resorted to as a last
desperate effort to rouse the energy of the troops or the hopes
of the people--a collusion similar to that of the celebrated
Constantinian Cross, or of the Holy Lance of Antioch. Every
reader is acquainted with the fate of the great personages who in
England were accused, politically or popularly, of the crime; and
the histories of the Duchess of Gloucester and of Jane Shore are
immortalised by Shakspeare. In 1417, Joan, second wife of Henry
IV., had been sentenced to prison, suspected of seeking the
king's death by sorcery; a certain Friar Randolf being her
accomplice and agent. The Duchess of Gloucester, wife of Humphry
and daughter of Lord Cobham, was an accomplice in the witchcraft
of a priest and an old woman. Her associates were Sir Roger
Bolingbroke, priest; Margery Jordan or Guidemar, of Eye, in
Suffolk; Thomas Southwell, and Roger Only. It was asserted 'there
was found in their possession a waxen image of the king, which
they melted in a magical manner before a slow fire, with the
intention of making Henry's force and vigour waste away by like
insensible degrees.' The duchess was sentenced to do penance and
to perpetual imprisonment; Margery was burnt for a witch in
Smithfield; the priest was hanged, declaring his employers had
only desired to know of him how long the king would live; Thomas
Southwell died the night before his execution; Roger Only was
hanged, having first written a book to prove his own innocence,
and against the opinion of the vulgar.[69] Jane Shore (whose
story is familiar to all), the mistress of Edward IV., was
sacrificed to the policy of Richard Duke of Gloucester, more than
to any general suspicion of her guilt. Both the Archbishop of
York and the Bishop of Ely were involved with the citizen's wife
in demoniacal dealings, and imprisoned in the Tower. As for the
'harlot, strumpet Shore,' not being convicted, or at least
condemned, for the worse crime, she was found guilty of adultery,
and sentenced (a milder fate) to do penance in a white sheet
before the assembled populace at St. Paul's.[70]

  [69] The historian of England justly reflects on this case
  that the nature of the crime, so opposite to all common
  sense, seems always to exempt the accusers from using the
  rules of common sense in their evidence.

  [70] This unfortunate woman was celebrated for her beauty
  and, with one important exception, for her virtues; and, if
  her vanity could not resist the fascination of a royal lover,
  her power had been often, it is said, exerted in the cause of
  humanity. Notwithstanding the neglect and ill-treatment
  experienced from the ingratitude of former fawning courtiers
  and people, she reached an advanced age, for she was living
  in the time of Sir Thomas More, who relates that 'when the
  Protector had awhile laid unto her, for the manner sake, that
  she went about to bewitch him, and that she was of counsel
  with the lord chamberlain to destroy him; in conclusion, when
  no colour could fasten upon this matter, then he laid
  heinously to her charge the thing that herself could not
  deny, that all the world wist was true, and that natheless
  every man laughed at to hear it then so suddenly so highly
  taken--that she was naught of her body.'--_Reign of Richard
  III._, quoted by Bishop Percy in _Reliques of Old English
  Romance Poetry_. The deformed prince fiercely attributes his
  proverbial misfortune to hostile witchcraft. He addresses his
  trembling council:

       'Look how I am bewitch'd; behold mine arm
        Is, like a blasted sapling, wither'd up:
        And this is Edward's wife, that monstrous witch,
        Consorted with that harlot, strumpet Shore,
        That by their witchcraft thus have marked me.'

                      _Richard III._ act iii. sc. 4.

More tremendous than any of the cases above narrated is that of
Arras, where numbers of all classes suffered. So transparent were
the secret but real motives of the chief agitators, that even the
unbounded credulity of the public could penetrate the thin
disguise. The affair commenced with the accusation of a woman of
Douai, called Demiselle (une femme de folle vie). Put to the
torture repeatedly, this wretched woman was forced to confess she
had frequented a meeting of sorcerers where several persons were
seen and recognised; amongst others Jehan Levite, a painter at
Arras. The chronicler of the fifteenth century relates the
diabolical catastrophe thus: 'A terrible and melancholy
transaction took place this year (1459) in the town of Arras, the
capital of the county of Artois, which said transaction was
called, I know not why, _Vaudoisie_: but it was said that certain
men and women transported themselves whither they pleased from
the places where they were seen, by virtue of a compact with the
devil. Suddenly they were carried to forests and deserts, where
they found assembled great numbers of both sexes, and with them a
devil in the form of a man, whose face they never saw. This devil
read to them, or repeated his laws and commandments in what way
they were to worship and serve him: then each person kissed his
back, and he gave to them after this ceremony some little money.
He then regaled them with great plenty of meats and wines, when
the lights were extinguished, and each man selected a female for
amorous dalliance; and suddenly they were transported back to the
places they had come from. For such criminal and mad acts many of
the principal persons of the town were imprisoned; and others of
the lower ranks, with women, and such as were known to be of this
sect, were so terribly tormented, that some confessed matters to
have happened as has been related. They likewise confessed to
have seen and known many persons of rank, prelates, nobles, and
governors of districts, as having been present at these meetings;
such, indeed, as, upon the rumour of common fame, their judges
and examiners named, and, as it were, put into their mouths: so
that through the pains of the torments they accused many, and
declared they had seen them at these meetings. Such as had been
thus accused were instantly arrested, and so long and grievously
tormented that they were forced to confess just whatever their
judges pleased, when those of the lower rank were inhumanly
burnt. Some of the richer and more powerful ransomed themselves
from this disgrace by dint of money; while others of the highest
orders were remonstrated with, and seduced by their examiners
into confession under a promise that if they would confess, they
should not suffer either in person or property. Others, again,
suffered the severest torments with the utmost patience and
fortitude. The judges received very large sums of money from such
as were able to pay them: others fled the country, or completely
proved their innocence of the charges made against them, and
remained unmolested. It must not be concealed (proceeds
Monstrelet) that many persons of worth knew that these charges
had been raked up by a set of wicked persons to harass and
disgrace some of the principal inhabitants of Arras, whom they
hated with the bitterest rancour, and from avarice were eager to
possess themselves of their fortunes. They at first maliciously
arrested some persons deserving of punishment for their crimes,
whom they had so severely tormented, holding out promises of
pardon, that they forced them to accuse whomsoever they were
pleased to name. This matter was considered [it must have been an
exceedingly ill-devised plot to provoke suspicion and even
indignation in such a matter] by all men of sense and virtue as
most abominable: and it was thought that those who had thus
destroyed and disgraced so many persons of worth would put their
souls in imminent danger at the last day.'[71]

  [71] Enguerrand de Monstrelet's _Chronicles_, lib. iii. cap.
  93, Johnes' Translation. _Vaudoisie_, which puzzles the
  annalist, seems to disclose the pretence, if not the motive,
  of the proceedings. Yet it is not easy to conceive so large
  a number of all classes involved in the proscribed heresy of
  the Vaudois in a single city in the north of France.

Meanwhile the inquisitor, Jacques Dubois, doctor in theology,
dean of Nôtre Dame at Arras, ordered the arrest of Levite the
artist, and made him confess he had attended the 'Vauldine;' that
he had seen there many people, men and women, burghers,
ecclesiastics, whose names were specified. The bishops' vicars,
overwhelmed by the number and quality of the involved, began to
dread the consequence, and wished to stop the proceedings. But
this did not satisfy the projects of two of the most active
promoters, Jacques Dubois and the Bishop of Bayrut, who urged the
Comte d'Estampes to use his authority with the vicars to proceed
energetically against the prisoners. Soon afterwards the matter
was brought to a crisis; the fate of the tortured convicts was
decided, and amidst thousands of spectators from all parts, they
were brought out, each with a mitre on his head, on which was
painted the devil in the form in which he appeared at the general
assemblies, and burned.

They admitted (under the severest torture, promises, and threats)
the truth of their meetings at the sabbaths. They used a sort of
ointment well known in witch-pharmacy for rubbing a small wooden
rod and the palms of their hands, and by a very common mode of
conveyance were borne away suddenly to the appointed rendezvous.
Here their lord and master was expecting them in the shape of a
goat with the face of a man and the tail of an ape. Homage was
first done by his new vassals offering up their soul or some part
of the body; afterwards in adoration kissing him on the back--the
accustomed salutation.[72] Next followed the different signs and
ceremonies of the infernal vassalage, in particular treading and
spitting upon the cross. Then to eating and drinking; after which
the guests joined in acts of indescribable debauchery, when the
devil took the form alternately of either sex. Dismissal was
given by a mock sermon, forbidding to go to church, hear mass, or
touch holy water. All these acts indicate schismatic offences
which yet for the most part are the characteristics of the
sabbaths in later Protestant witchcraft, excepting that the
wicked apostates are there usually _papistical_ instead of
_protestant_. During nearly two years Arras was subjected to the
arbitrary examinations and tortures of the inquisitors; and
an appeal to the Parliament of Paris could alone stop the
proceedings, 1461. The chance of acquittal by the verdict of the
public was little: it was still less by the sentence of judicial
tribunals.

  [72] The 'Osculum in tergo' seems to be an indispensable
  part of the Homagium or _Diabolagium_.