CHAPTER II.

     Charlemagne's Severity--Anglo-Saxon Superstition--Norman and
     Arabic Magic--Influence of Arabic Science--Mohammedan Belief
     in Magic--Rabbinical Learning--Roger Bacon--The Persecution
     of the Templars--Alice Kyteler.


Tremendous as was the power of the witch in earlier Christendom,
it was not yet degraded into the thoroughly diabolistic character
of her more recent successors. Diabolism advanced in the same
proportion with the authority of the Church and the ignorant
submission of the people. In the civil law, the Emperor Leo, in
the sixth century, abrogated the Constantinian edict as too
indulgent or too credulous: from that time all sorts of charms,
all use of them, beneficial or injurious, were declared worthy of
punishment. The different states of Europe, founded on the ruins
of the Western Empire, more or less were engaged in providing
against the evil consequences of sorcery. Charlemagne pursued the
criminals with great severity. He 'had several times given orders
that all necromancers, astrologers, and witches should be driven
from his states; but as the number of criminals augmented daily,
he found it necessary at last to resort to severer measures. In
consequence, he published several edicts, which may be found at
length in the "Capitulaire de Baluse." By these every sort of
magic, enchantment, and witchcraft was forbidden, and the
punishment of death decreed against those who in any way evoked
the devil, compounded love-philters, afflicted either man or
woman with barrenness, troubled the atmosphere, excited tempests,
destroyed the fruits of the earth, dried up the milk of cows, or
tormented their fellow-creatures with sores and diseases. All
persons found guilty of exercising these execrable arts were to
be executed immediately upon conviction, that the earth might be
rid of the curse and burden of their presence; and those who
consulted them might also be punished with death.'[48]

  [48] M. Garinet's _Histoire de la Magic en France_, quoted
  in _Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular Delusions_.

The Saxons, in the fifth century, imported into Britain the pagan
forms of the Fatherland; and the Anglo-Saxon (Christian) laws are
usually directed against practices connected with heathen
worship, of which many reminiscences were long preserved. Their
Hexe, or witch,[49] appears to be half-divine, half-diabolic, a
witch-priestess who derived her inspiration as much from heavenly
as from hellish sources; from some divinity or genius presiding
at a sacred grove or fountain. King Athelstan is said to have
made a law against witchcraft and similar acts which inflict
death; that if one by them be made away, and the thing cannot be
denied, such practicers shall be put to death; but if they
endeavour to purge themselves, and be cast by the threefold
ordeal, they shall be in prison 120 days; which ended, their
kindred may redeem them by the payment [in the universal style of
the English penalties] of 120 shillings to the king, and further
pay to the kindred of the slain the full valuation of the party's
head; and then the criminals shall also procure sureties for good
behaviour for the time to come; and the Danish prince Knut
denounces by an express doom the noxious acts of sorcery.[50]
Some of the witches who appear under Saxon domination are almost
as ferocious as those of the time of Bodin or of James; cutting
up the bodies of the dead, especially of children, devouring
their heart and liver in midnight revels. Fearful are the deeds
of Saxon sorcery as related by the old Norman or Anglo-Norman
writers. Roger of Wendover ('Flowers of History') records the
terrible fate of a hag who lived in the village of Berkely, in
the ninth century. The devil at the appointed hour (as in the
case of Faust) punctually carries off the soul of his slave, in
spite of the utmost watch and ward. These scenes are, perhaps,
rather Norman than Saxon. It was a favourite belief of the
ancients and mediævalists that the inhospitable regions of the
remoter North were the abode of demons who held in those suitable
localities their infernal revels, exciting storms and tempests:
and the monk-chronicler Bede relates the northern parts of
Britain were thus infested.[51]

  [49] The Saxon 'witch' is derived, apparently, from the verb
  'to weet,' to know, _be wise_. The Latin 'saga' is similarly
  derived--'Sagire, sentire acute est: ex quo _sagæ_ anus,
  quia malta _scire_ volunt.'--Cicero, _de Divinatione_.

  [50] A curious collection of old English superstitions in
  these and their allied forms, as exhibited in various
  documents, appears in a recent work of authority, entitled
  'Leechdoms, Wort-Cunning, and Starcraft of Early England.
  Published by the authority of the Lords Commissioners of Her
  Majesty's Treasury, under the direction of the Master of the
  Rolls.' Diseases of all sorts are for the most part inflicted
  upon mankind by evil demons, through the agency of spells and
  incantations.

  [51] Strutt derives the 'long-continued custom of swimming
  people suspected of witchcraft' from the Anglo-Saxon mode of
  judicial trial--the ordeal by water. Another 'method of
  proving a witch,' by weighing against the Church Bible (a
  formidable balance), is traced to some of their ancient
  customs. James VI. (_Demonologie_) is convinced that 'God
  hath appointed, for a supernatural sign of the monstrous
  impiety of witches, that the water shall refuse to receive
  them in her bosom that have shaken off them the sacred water
  of baptism and wilfully refused the benefit thereof.'

From Scandinavia the Normans must have brought a conviction of
the truths of magic; and although they had been long settled,
before the conquest of England, in Northern France and in
Christianity, the traditional glories of the land from which were
derived their name and renown could not be easily forgotten. Not
long after the Conquest the Arabic learning of Spain made its way
into this country, and it is possible that Christian magic, as
well as science, may have been influenced by it. Magic,
scientifically treated, flourished in Arabic Spain, being
extensively cultivated, in connection with more real or practical
learning, by the polite and scientific Arabs. The schools of
Salamanca, Toledo, and other Saracenic cities were famous
throughout Europe for eminence in medicine, chymistry, astronomy,
and mathematics. Thither resorted the learned of the North to
perfect themselves in the then cultivated branches of knowledge.
The vast amount of scientific literature of the Moslems of Spain,
evidenced in their public libraries, relieves Southern Europe,
in part at least, from the stigma of a universal barbaric
illiteracy.[52] Several volumes of Arabian philosophy are said to
have been introduced to Northern Europe in the twelfth century;
and it was in the school of Toledo that Gerbert--a conspicuous
name in the annals of magic--acquired his preternatural
knowledge.

  [52] The royal library of the Fatimites consisted of 100,000
  manuscripts, elegantly transcribed and splendidly bound,
  which were lent, without avarice or jealousy, to the
  students of Cairo. Yet this collection must appear moderate
  if we believe that the Ommiades of Spain had formed a
  library of 600,000 volumes, 44 of which were employed in the
  mere catalogue. Their capital, Cordova, with the adjacent
  towns of Malaga, Almeira, and Murcia, had given birth to
  more than 300 writers; and above 70 public libraries were
  opened in the cities of the Andalusian kingdom.--_Decline
  and Fall of the Roman Empire_, lii.

The few in any way acquainted with Greek literature were indebted
to the Latin translations of the Arabs; while the Jewish
rabbinical learning, whose more useful lore was encumbered with
much mystical nonsense, enjoyed considerable reputation at this
period. The most distinguished of the rabbis taught in the
schools in London, York, Lincoln, Oxford, and Cambridge; and
Christendom has to confess its obligations for its first
acquaintance with science to the enemies of the Cross.[53] The
later Jewish authorities had largely developed the demonology of
the subjects of Persia; and the spiritual or demoniacal creations
of the rabbinical works of the Middle Ages might be readily
acceptable, if not coincident, to Christian faith. But the
Western Europeans, before the philosophy of the Spanish Arabs was
known, had come in contact with the Saracens and Turks of the
East during frequent pilgrimages to the tomb of Christ; and the
fanatical crusades of the eleventh and twelfth centuries
facilitated and secured the hazardous journey. Mohammedans of the
present day preserve the implicit faith of their ancestors in the
efficacy of the 113th chapter of the Koran against evil spirits,
the spells of witches and sorcerers--a chapter said to have been
revealed to the Prophet of Islam on the occasion of his having
been bewitched by the daughters of a Jew. The Genii or Ginn--a
Preadamite race occupying an intermediate position between angels
and men, who assume at pleasure the form of men, of the lower
animals, or any monstrous shape, and propagate their species
like, and sometimes with, human kind--appear in imposing
proportions in 'The Thousand and One Nights'--that rich display
of the fancy of the Oriental imagination.[54] Credulous and
confused in critical perception, the crusading adventurers for
religion or rapine could scarcely fail to confound with their own
the peculiar tenets of an ill-understood mode of thought; and
that the critical and discriminating faculties of the champions
of the Cross were not of the highest order, is illustrated by
their difficulty in distinguishing the eminently unitarian
religion of Mohammed from paganism. By a strange perversion the
Anglo-Norman and French chroniclers term the Moslems _Pagans_,
while the Saxon heathen are dignified by the title of _Saracens_;
and the names of Mahmoud, Termagaunt, Apollo, could be confounded
without any sense of impropriety. However, or in whatever degree,
Saracenic or rabbinical superstition tended to influence
Christian demonology, from about the end of the thirteenth
century a considerable development in the mythology of witchcraft
is perceptible.[55]

  [53] Chymistry and Algebra still attest our obligation by
  their Arabic etymology.

  [54] A common tradition is that Soliman, king of the Jews,
  having finally subdued--a success which he owed chiefly to
  his vast magical resources--the rebellious spirits, punished
  their disobedience by incarcerating them in various kinds of
  prisons, for longer or shorter periods of time, in proportion
  to their demerits. For the belief of the followers of
  Mohammed in the magic excellence of Solomon, see Sale's
  _Koran_, xxi. and xxvii. According to the prophet, the devil
  taught men magic and sorcery. The magic of the Moslems, or,
  at least, of the Egyptians, is of two kinds--high and
  low--which are termed respectively _rahmanee_ (divine) and
  _sheytanee_ (Satanic). By a perfect knowledge of the former
  it is possible to the adept to 'raise the dead to life, kill
  the living, transport himself instantly wherever he pleases,
  and perform any other miracle. The _low_ magic (_sooflee_ or
  _sheytanee_) is believed to depend on the agency of the devil
  and evil spirits, and unbelieving genii, and to be used for
  bad purposes and by bad men.' The _divine_ is 'founded on the
  agency of God and of His angels, &c., and employed always for
  good purposes, and only to be practised by men of probity,
  who, by tradition or from books, learn the names of those
  superhuman agents, &c.'--Lane's _Modern Egyptians_, chap.
  xii.

  [55] Its effect was probably to enlarge more than to modify
  appreciably the current ideas. A large proportion of the
  importations from the East may have been indebted to the
  invention, as much as to the credulity, of the adventurers;
  and we might be disposed to believe with Hume, that 'men
  returning from so great a distance used the liberty [a too
  general one] of imposing every fiction upon their believing
  audience.'

Conspicuous in the vulgar prejudices is the suspicion attaching
to the extraordinary discoveries of philosophy and science.
Diabolic inspiration (as in our age infidelity and atheism are
popular outcries) was a ready and successful accusation against
ideas or discoveries in advance of the time. Roger Bacon, Robert
Grostête, Albert the Great, Thomas of Ercildoun, Michael
Scot--eminent names--were all more or less objects of a
persecuting suspicion. Bacon may justly be considered the
greatest name in the philosophy of the Middle Age. That anomaly
of mediævalism was one of the few who could neglect a vain and
senseless theology and system of metaphysics to apply his genius
to the solid pursuits of truer philosophy; and if his influence
has not been so great as it might have been, it is the fault of
the age rather than of the man. Condemned by the fear or jealousy
of his Franciscan brethren and Dominican rivals, Bacon was thrown
into prison, where he was excluded from propagating 'certain
suspected novelties' during fourteen years, a victim of his more
liberal opinions and of theological hatred. One of the traditions
of his diabolical compacts gives him credit at least for
ingenuity in avoiding at once a troublesome bargain and a
terrible fate. The philosopher's compact stipulated that after
death his soul was to be the reward and possession of the devil,
whether he died within the church's sacred walls or without them.
Finding his end approaching, that sagacious magician caused a
cell to be constructed in the walls of the consecrated edifice,
giving directions, which were properly carried out, for his
burial in a tomb that was thus neither within nor without the
church--an evasion of a long-expected event, which lost the
disappointed devil his prize, and probably his temper. 'Friar
Bacon' became afterwards a well-known character in the vulgar
fables: he was the type of the mediæval, as the poet Virgil was
of the ancient, magician. A popular drama was founded on his
reputed exploits and character in the sixteenth century, by
Robert Greene, in 'Friar Bacon and Friar Bungay;' but the famous
Dr. Faustus, the most popular magic hero of that time on the
stage, was a formidable rival. While his cotemporaries denounced
his rational method, preferring their theological jargon and
scholastic metaphysics; how much the Aristotle of mediævalism has
been neglected even latterly is a surprising fact.[56]

  [56] The Universities of Oxford and Cambridge have not
  exhibited the same impatience for a worthy edition of the
  works of Bacon with which Clement IV. expected a copy of the
  _Opus Majus_. His principal writings remained in MS. and
  were not published to the world until the middle of last
  century.

But in proof of the prevalence of the popular suspicion, not even
the all-powerful spiritual Chief of Christendom was spared. Many
of the pontiffs were charged with being addicted to the 'Black
Art'--an odd imputation against the vicars of Christ and the
successors of St. Peter. A charge, however, which we may be
disposed to receive as evidence that in a long and disgusting
list of ambitious priests and licentious despots there have been
some popes who, by cultivating philosophy, may have in some
sort partially redeemed the hateful character of Christian
sacerdotalism. At a council held at Paris in the interest of
Philip IV., Boniface VIII. was publicly accused of sorcery: it
was affirmed that 'he had a familiar demon [the Socratic
Genius?]; for he has said that if all mankind were on one side
and he alone on the other, he could not be mistaken either in
point of fact or of right, which presupposes a diabolical art'--a
dogma of sacerdotalism sufficiently confident, but scarcely
requiring a miraculous solution. This pope's death, it is said,
was hastened by these and similar reports of his dealings with
familiar spirits, invented in the interest of the French king to
justify his hostility. Boniface VIII.'s esoteric opinions on
Catholicism and Christianity, if correctly reported, did not show
the orthodoxy to be expected from the supreme pontiff: but he
would not be a singular example amongst the numerous occupants of
the chair of St. Peter.[57]

  [57] Leo X. (whose tastes were rather profane than pious)
  instructed or amused himself by causing to be discussed the
  question of the nature of the soul--himself adopting the
  opinion 'redit in nihilum quod fuit ante nihil,' and the
  decision of Aristotle and of Epicurus.

John XXII., one of his more immediate successors, is said to be
the pope who first formally condemned the crime of witchcraft,
more systematically anathematised some hundred and fifty years
afterwards by Innocent VIII. He complains of the universal
infection of Christendom: that his own court even, and immediate
attendants, were attached to the devil's service, applying to him
on all occasions for help. The earliest judicial trial for the
crime on record in England is said to have occurred in the reign
of John. It is briefly stated in the 'Abbreviatio Placitorum'
that 'Agnes, the wife of Odo the merchant, accused Gideon of
sorcery; and he was acquitted by the judgment of iron.' The first
account of which much information is given occurs in Edward II.'s
reign, when the lives of the royal favourites, the De Spencers,
and his own, were attempted by a supposed criminal, one John of
Nottingham, with the assistance of his man, Robert Marshall, who
became king's evidence, and charged his master with having
conspired the king's death by the arts of sorcery.[58] Cupidity
or malice was the cause of this informer's accusation. One of the
distinguishing characteristics in its annals was the abuse of the
common prejudice for political purposes, or for the gratification
of private passion.

  [58] _Narratives of Sorcery and Magic_, by Thomas Wright.

At the commencement of the fourteenth century the persecution and
final destruction of the Order of the Knights Templars in the
different countries of Europe, but chiefly in France (an instance
of the former abuse), is one of the most atrocious facts in
the history of those times. The fate of the Knights of the
Temple (whose original office it had been to protect their
coreligionists during pilgrimages in the Holy City, and whose
quarters were near the site of the Temple--whence the title of
the Order) in France was determined by the jealousy or avarice of
Philip IV. Founded in the first half of the twelfth century as a
half-religious, half-military institution, that celebrated Order
was, in its earlier career, in high repute for valour and success
in fighting the battles of the Cross. With wealth and fame, pride
and presumption increased to the highest pitch; and at the end of
150 years the champions of Christendom were equally hated and
feared. Their entire number was no more than 1,500; but they were
all experienced warriors, in possession of a number of important
fortresses, besides landed property to the amount, throughout
their whole extent, of nine thousand manorial estates. When the
Holy Land was hopelessly lost to the profane ambition or
religious zeal of the West, its defenders returned to their homes
loaded with riches and prestige if not with unstained honour, and
without insinuations that they had betrayed the cause of Christ
and the Crusades. Such was the condition of the Temple when
Philip, after exhausting the coffers of Jews and Christians,
found his treasury still unfilled. The opportunity was not to
be neglected: it remained only to secure the consent of the
Church, and to provoke the ready credulity of the people. Church
and State united, supported by the popular superstition,
were irresistible; and the destined victims expected their
impending fate in silent terror. At length the signal was given.
Prosecutions in 1307 were carried on simultaneously throughout
the provinces; but in French territory they assumed the most
formidable shape. In many places they were acquitted of the
gravest indictments: the English king, from a feeling of justice
or jealousy, expressed himself in their favour. As for Spain, 'it
was not in presence of the Moors, and on the classic ground of
Crusade, that the thought could be entertained of proscribing the
old defenders of Christendom.' Paris, where was their principal
temple, was the centre of the Order; their wealth and power were
concentrated in France; and thus the spoils not of a single
province, but almost of the entire body, were within the grasp of
a single monarch. Hence he assumed the right of presiding as
judge and executioner.[59] On October 12, 1307, Jacques Molay,
with the heads of the Temple, was invited to Paris, where, loaded
with favours, they were lulled into fatal security. The delusion
was soon abruptly dispelled. Molay, together with 140 of his
brethren, was arrested--the signal for a more general procedure
throughout the kingdom.

  [59] Dante seems to refer to this recent spoliation in the
  following verses:--

       'Lo! the new Pilate, of whose cruelty
        Such violence cannot fill the measure up,
        With no decree to sanction, pushes on
        Into the Temple his yet eager sails.'

                      _Purgat._ xx. Cary's Transl.

The charges have been resolved under three heads: (1) The denial
of Christ. (2) Treachery to the cause of Christianity. (3) The
worship of the devil, and the practice of sorcery. The principal
articles in the indictment were that the knights at initiation
formally denied the divinity of Christ, pronouncing he was not
truly a God--even going so far as to assert he was a false
prophet, a man who had been punished for his crimes; that they
had no hopes of salvation through him; that at the final
reception they always spat on the Cross, trampling it under foot;
that they worshipped the devil in the form of a cat, or some
other familiar animal; that they adored him in the figure of an
idol consecrated by anointing it with the fat of a new-born
infant, the illegitimate offspring of a brother; that a demon
appeared in the shape of a black or gray cat, &c. The idol is a
mysterious object. According to some it was a head with a beard,
or a head with three faces: by others it was said to be a skull,
a cat. One witness testified that in a chapter of the Order one
brother said to another, 'Worship this head; it is your God and
your Mahomet.' Of this kind was the general evidence of the
witnesses examined. Less incredible, perhaps, is the statement
that they sometimes saw demons in the appearance of women; and a
more credible allegation is that of a secret understanding with
the Turks.

Notoriously suspicious communication had been maintained with the
enemy; they even went so far as to adopt their style of dress and
living. Worse than all, by an amiable but unaccustomed tolerance,
the followers of Mohammed had been allowed a free exercise of
their religion, a sort of liberality little short of apostasy
from the faith. Without recounting all the horrors of the
persecution, it must be sufficient to repeat that fifty-four
of the wretched condemned, having been degraded by the Bishop
of Paris, were handed over to the flames. Four years afterwards
the scene was consummated by the burning of Jacques Molay.
Torture of the most dreadful sort had been applied to force
necessary confessions; and the complaint of one of the criminals
is significant--'I, single, as I am, cannot undertake to argue
with the Pope and the King of France.'[60] In attempting to
detect the mysterious facts of this dark transaction little
assistance is given by the contradictory statements of cotemporary
or later writers; some asserting the charges to be mere
fabrications throughout; others their positive reality; and recent
historians have attempted to substantiate or destroy them. Hallam
truly remarks that the rapacious and unprincipled conduct of
Philip, the submission of Clement V. to his will, the apparent
incredibility of the charges from their monstrousness, the just
prejudice against confessions obtained by torture and retracted
afterwards; the other prejudice, not always so just, but in the
case of those not convicted on fair evidence deserving a better
name, in favour of assertions of innocence made on the scaffold
and at the stake, created, as they still preserve, a strong
willingness to disbelieve the accusations which come so
suspiciously before us.[61] An approximation to the truth may
be obtained if, rejecting as improbable the accusations of
devil-worship and its concomitant rites which, invented to
amuse the vulgar, characterise the proceedings, we admit the
_probability_ of a secret understanding with the Turks, or the
_possibility_ of infidelity to the religion of Christ. Their
destruction had been predetermined; the slender element of truth
might soon be exaggerated and confounded with every kind of
fiction. Their pride, avarice, luxury, corrupt morals, would give
colour to the most absurd inventions.[62]

  [60] Michelet's _History of France_, book v. 4. M. Michelet
  suggests an ingenious explanation of some of their supposed
  secret practices. 'The principal charge, the denial of the
  Saviour, rested on an equivocation. The Templars might
  confess to the denial without being in reality apostates.
  Many averred that it was a symbolical denial, in imitation
  of St. Peter's--one of those pious comedies in which the
  antique Church enveloped the most serious acts of religion,
  but whose traditional meaning was beginning to be lost in
  the fourteenth century.' The idol-head, believed to
  represent Mohammed or the devil, he supposes to have been 'a
  representation of the Paraclete, whose festival, that of
  Pentecost, was the highest solemnity of the Temple.' Some
  have identified them, like those of the Albigenses or
  Waldenses, with the ceremonies of the Gnostics.

  [61] _View of the Middle Ages_, chap. i. The judicial
  impartiality (eulogised by Macaulay) and patient
  investigation of truth (the first merits of a historian) of
  the author of the _Constitutional History of England_, might
  almost entitle him to rank with the first of historians,
  Gibbon.

  [62] The alliance of the Church--of the Dominican Order in
  particular--with the secular power against its once foremost
  champions, is paralleled and explained by the causes that led
  to the dissolution of the Order of Jesus by Clement XIV. in
  the eighteenth century--fear and jealousy.

If the history of the extermination of the Templars exemplifies
in an eminent manner the political uses made by the highest in
office of a prevalent superstition, the story of Alice Kyteler
illustrates equally the manner in which it was prostituted to the
private purposes of designing impostors. The scene is in Ireland,
the period the first half of the fourteenth century; Richard de
Ledrede, Bishop of Ossory, being the principal prosecutor, and a
lady, Alice Kyteler, the defendant. The details are too tedious
to be repeated here;[63] but the articles upon which the
conviction of Alice Kyteler and her accomplices was sought are
not dissimilar to those just narrated. To give effect to their
sorcery they were in the habit of denying the faith for a year,
or shorter period, as the object to be attained was greater or
less. Demons were propitiated with sacrifices of living animals,
torn limb by limb and scattered (a Hecatean feast) about
cross-roads. It was alleged that by sorceries they obtained help
from the devil; that they impiously used the ceremonies of the
Church in nightly conventicles, pronouncing with lighted candles
of wax excommunication against the persons of their own husbands,
naming expressly every member from the sole of the foot to the
top of the head. Their compositions are of the Horatian and
Shakspearian sort. With the intestines of cocks were sacrificed
various herbs, the nails of dead men, hair, brains, and clothes
of children dying unbaptized, with other equally efficacious
ingredients, boiled in the skull of a certain famous robber
recently beheaded: powders, ointments, and candles of fat boiled
in the same skull were the intended instruments for exciting love
or hatred, and in affecting the bodies of the faithful. An unholy
connection existed between the Lady Alice and a demon in the form
sometimes of a black dog, sometimes of a cat. She was possessed
of a secret ointment for impregnating a piece of wood, upon
which, with her companions, she was carried to any part of the
world without hurt or hindrance: in her house was found a wafer
of consecrated bread inscribed with the name of the devil. The
event of this trial was the conviction and imprisonment of the
criminals, with the important exception of the chief object of
the bishop's persecution, who contrived an escape to England.
Petronilla de Meath was the first to suffer the extreme penalty.
This lady, by order of the bishop, had been six times flogged,
when, to escape a repetition of that barbarous infliction, she
made a public confession involving her fellow-prisoners. After
which Petronilla was carried out into the city and burned before
all the people--the first witch, it is said, ever burned in
Ireland. Of the other accused all were treated with more or less
severity; two were subsequently burned, some were publicly
flogged in the market-place and through the city, others
banished; a few, more fortunate, escaping altogether.

  [63] They are given in full in _Narratives of Sorcery and
  Magic from the most Authentic Sources_, by Thomas Wright. In
  the _Annals of Ireland_, affixed to Camden's _Britannia_,
  ed. 1695, sub anno 1325 A.D., the case of Dame Alice Ketyll
  is briefly chronicled. Being cited and examined by the
  Bishop of Ossory, it was discovered, among other things,
  'That a certain spirit called Robin Artysson lay with her;
  and that she offered him nine red cocks on a stone bridge
  where the highway branches out into four several parts.
  _Item_: That she swept the streets of Kilkenny with besoms
  between Compline and Courefeu, and in sweeping the filth
  towards the house of William Utlaw, her son, by way of
  conjuring, wished that all the wealth of Kilkenny might flow
  thither. The accomplices of this Alice in these devilish
  practices were Pernil of Meth, and Basilia the daughter of
  this Pernil. Alice, being found guilty, was fined by the
  bishop, and forced to abjure her sorcery and witchcraft. But
  being again convicted of the same practice, she made her
  escape with Basilia, and was never found. But Pernil was
  burnt at Kilkenny, and before her death declared that
  William above-said deserved punishment as well as she--that
  for a year and a day he wore the devil's girdle about his
  bare body,' &c.